--- Página 1 ---
CHAPTER 1 3  
Data Quality  
1.Introduction
ffective data management involves a set of complex, interrelated processes that enable an organization 
to use its data to achieve strategic goals. Data management  includes the ability to design data for 
applications, store and access it securely, share it appropriately, learn from it, and ensure it meets 
business needs. An assumption underlying assertions about the value of data is that the data itself is reliable and trustworthy. In other words, that it is of high quality . 
Data Warehousing 
& Business 
Intelligence
Reference 
& Master 
DataDocument 
&Content
ManagementData Integration & 
InteroperabilityData 
SecurityData Storage 
& OperationsData Modeling 
& DesignData 
Architecture
Data Quality
MetadataData 
Governance
DAMA -DMBOK2 Data Management Framework
Copyright © 2017 by DAMA International
E 
449 
 
Para verificar as assinaturas, acesse www.tcu.gov.br/autenticidade e informe o código 79193014.

--- Página 2 ---
450 • DMBOK2  
However, many factors can undermine that assumption by contributing to poor quality data: Lack of 
understanding about the effects of poor quality data on organizational success, bad planning, ‘siloed’ system design, inconsistent development processes, incomplete documentation, a lack of standards, or a lack of governance. Many organizations fail to define what makes data fit for purpose.  
All data managemen t disciplines contribute to the quality of data, and high quality data that supports the 
organization should be the goal of all data management disciplines. Because uninformed decisions or actions by anyone who interacts with data can result in poor qualit y data, producing high quality data requires cross -
functional commitment and coordination. Organizations and teams should be aware of this and should plan for high quality data, by executing processes and projects in ways that account for risk related to unexpected or unacceptable conditions in the data.  
Because no organization has perfect business processes, perfect technical processes, or perfect data management practices, all organizations experience problems related to the quality of their data. Organi zations 
that formally manage the quality of data have fewer problems than those that leave data quality to chance.  
Formal data quality management is similar to continuous quality management for other products. It includes managing data through its lifecyc le by setting standards, building quality into the processes that create, 
transform, and store data, and measuring data against standards. Managing data to this level usually requires a Data Quality program team. The Data Quality program team is responsible for engaging both business and technical data management professionals and driving the work of applying quality management techniques to data to ensure that data is fit for consumption for a variety of purposes. The team will likely be involved with a series of projects through which they can establish processes and best practices while addressing high priority 
data issues.  
Because managing the quality of data involves managing the data lifecycle, a Data Quality program will also 
have operational respons ibilities related to data usage. For example, reporting on data quality levels and 
engaging in the analysis, quantification, and prioritization of data issues. The team is also responsible for working with those who need data to do their jobs to ensure the  data meets their needs and working with those 
who create, update, or delete data in the course of their jobs to ensure they are properly handling the data. Data quality depends on all who interact with the data, not just data management professionals.  
As is the case with Data Governance and with data management as a whole, Data Quality Management is a 
program, not a project. It will include both project and maintenance work, along with a commitment to communications and training. Most importantly, the long- term success of data quality improvement program 
depends on getting an organization to change its culture and adopt a quality mindset. As stated in The Leader’s Data Manifesto : fundamental, lasting change requires committed leadership and involvement from people at all 
levels in an organization. People who use data to do their jobs – which in most organizations is a very large 
percentage of employees – need to drive change. One of the most critical changes to focus on is how their 
organizations manage and improve the quality of their data.
71  
71 For the full text of The Leader’s Data Manifesto, see http://bit.ly/2sQhcy7 . 
 
Para verificar as assinaturas, acesse www.tcu.gov.br/autenticidade e informe o código 79193014.

--- Página 3 ---
DATA QUALITY  • 451  
Figure 91 Context Diagram : Data Quality  Definition: The planning, implementation, and control of activities that apply quality management techniques to 
data, in order to assure it is fit for consumption and meets the needs of data consumers.
Goals : 
1.De
velop a governed approach to make data fit for purpose based on data consumers’ requirements.
2.De
fine standards, requirements, and specifications for data quality controls as part of the data lifecycle.
3.De
fine and implement processes to measure, monitor, and report on data quality levels.
4.Id
entify and advocate for opportunities to improve the quality of data, through process and system improvements.
Activities :
1.Define High Quality Data (P)
2.Define a Data Quality Strategy (P)
3.Define Scope of Initial Assessment (P)
1. Identify Critical Data
2. Identify Existing Rules and Patterns
4.Perform Initial Data Quality Assessment (P)
1. Identify and prioritize issues2. Perform root cause analysis of issues
5.Identify & Prioritize Improvements
1. Prioritize Actions based on Business Impact2. Develop Preventative and Corrective Actions3. Confirm Planned Actions
6.Develop and Deploy Data QualityOperations (D)
1. Develop Data Quality Operational Procedures2. Correct Data Quality Defects3. Measure and Monitor Data Quality4. Report on Data Quality levels and findingsInputs :
• Data Policies and
Standards
• Data QualityExpectations
• Busine
ss
R
equirements
• Business Rule s
• Da
ta Requirements
• Business Metadata
• T echnical Metadata
• Data Sources a nd
D
ata Stores
• Data LineageDeliverables :
• Data Quality Strategy &
framework
• Data Quality Programorganization
• Analyses from Dat
a
P
rofiling
• Recommendations base d
o
n root cause analysis of 
issues
• DQM Procedures
• Data Quality Reports
• Data Quality GovernanceReports
• Data Quality Service LevelAgreements
• DQ Policies andGuidelines
Suppliers : 
• Business Management
• Subject Matter Experts
• Data Architects
• Data Modelers
• System Specialists
• Data Stewards
• Business Process Analysts Consumers : 
• Business Data Consumers
• Data Stewards
• Data Professionals
• IT Professionals
• Knowledge Workers
• Data Governance Bodies
• Partner Organizations
• Centers of ExcellenceParticipants : 
• CDO
• Data Quality Analysts
• Data Stewards
• Data Owners
• Data Analysts
• Database Administrators
• Data Professionals
• DQ Managers
• IT Operations
• Data Integration Architects
• Compliance T eam
T echniques : 
• Spot-Checking using Multiple 
Subsets
• Tags and Notes to Mark Dat a
I
ssues
• Root Cause Analysis
• Statistical Process ControlT ools : 
• Profiling engines, query tools
• Data Quality Rule T emplates
• Quality Check and Audit Code
ModulesMetrics : 
• Governance a nd
C
onformance Metrics
• Data Quality MeasurementResults
• Improvement trends
• Issue Management Metrics
(P) Planning, (C) Control, (D) Development, (O) OperationsData Quality Management
Business 
Drivers
Technical 
Drivers
 
Para verificar as assinaturas, acesse www.tcu.gov.br/autenticidade e informe o código 79193014.

--- Página 4 ---
452 • DMBOK2  
1.1 Business Drivers  
The business drivers for establishing a formal Data Qua lity Management program include:  
•Increasing the value of organizational data and the opportunities to use it
•Reducing risks and costs associated with poor quality dat a
•I
mproving organizational efficiency and productivity
•Protecting and enhancing the organization’s reputation
Organizations that want to get value out of their data recognize that high quality data is more valuable than low 
quality data. Poor quality data is risk -laden  (see Chapter 1). It can damage an organization’s reputation, 
resulting  in fines, lost revenue, lost customers, and negative media exposure. Regulatory requirements often 
demand high quality data. In addition, many direct costs are associated with poor quality data. For example,  
•Inability to invoice correctly
•Increased customer service calls and decreased ability to resolve them
•Revenue loss due to missed business opportunities
•Delay of integration during mergers and acquisitions
•Increased exposure to fraud
•Loss due to bad business decisions driven by bad data
•Loss of busi ness due to lack of good credit standing
Still high quality data is not an end in itself. It is a means to organizational success. Trustworthy data not only mitigates risk and reduces costs, but also improves efficiency. Employees can answer questions more quickly 
and consistently, when they are working with reliable data. They spend less time trying to figure out if the data is right and more time using the data to gain insight, make decisions, and serve customers.  
1.2 Goals and Principles 
Data Quality  programs focus on these general goals:  
•Developing a governed approach to make data fit for purpose based on data consumers’ requirements
•Defining standards and specifications for data quality controls as part of the data lifecycle
•Defining and implementing processes to measure, monitor, and report on data quality levels
•Identifying and advocating for opportunities to improve the quality of data, through changes t o
p
rocesses and systems and engaging in activitie s that measurably improve the quality of data based on
data consumer requirements
Data Quality programs should be guided by the following principles: 
•Criticality : A Data Quality program should focus on the data most critical to the enterprise and its
customers. Priorities for improvement should be based on the criticality of the data and on the level of
risk if data is not correct.
 
Para verificar as assinaturas, acesse www.tcu.gov.br/autenticidade e informe o código 79193014.

--- Página 5 ---
DATA QUALITY  • 453  
•Lifecycle management : The quali ty of data should be managed across the data lifecycle, from
creation or procurement through disposal. This includes managing data as it moves within and between
systems (i.e., each link in the data chain should ensure data output is of high quality).
•Prevention : The focus of a Data Quality program should be on preventing data errors and conditions
that reduce the usability of data; it should not be focused on simply correcting records.
•Root cause remediation : Improving the quality of data goes beyond corr ecting errors. Problems wit h
t
he quality of data should be understood and addressed at their root causes, rather than just their
symptoms. Because these causes are often related to process  or system design, improving data quality
often requires changes to processes and the systems that support them.
•Governance: Data Governance activities must support the development of high quality data and Dat a
Q
uality program activities must support and sustain a governed data environment.
•Standards- driven : All stakehold ers in the data lifecycle have data quality requirements. To the degr ee
p
ossible, these requirements should be defined in the form of measurable standards and expectations
against which the quality of data can be measured.
•Objective measurement and transpa rency : Data quality levels need to be measured objectively and
consistently. Measurements and measurement methodology should be shared with stakeholders sincethey are the arbiters of quality.
•Embedded in business processes: Business process owners are responsible for the quality of dat
a
p
roduced through their processes. They must enforce data quality standards in their processes.
•Systematically enforced : System owners must systematically enforce data quality requirements.
•Connected to service levels : Data quality reporting and issues management should be incorporate d
i
nto Service Level Agreements (SLA).
1.3 Essential Concepts 
1.3.1 Data Quality  
The term data quality  refers both to  the characteristics associated with high quality data and to the processes 
used to measure or improve the quality of data. These dual usages can be confusing, so it helps to separate them and clarify what constitutes high quality data.
72  
72 In the DAMA -DMBOK2, we have tried to avoid using the words data quality  without clarifying their context. For 
example, referring to high quality data or low quali ty data , and to data quality work efforts  or data quality activities .  
 
Para verificar as assinaturas, acesse www.tcu.gov.br/autenticidade e informe o código 79193014.

--- Página 6 ---
454 • DMBOK2  
Data is of high q uality to the degree that it meets the expectations and needs of data consumers. That is, if the 
data is fit for the purposes to which they want to apply it. It is of low quality if it is not fit for those purposes. 
Data quality is thus dependent on context and on the needs of the data consumer.  
One of the challenges in managing the quality of data is that expectations related to quality are not always 
known. Customers may not articulate them. Often, the people managing data do not even ask about these requirements. However, if data is to be reliable and trustworthy, then data management professionals need to 
better understand their customers’ quality requirements and how to measure them. This needs to be an ongoing discussion, as requirements change over t ime as business needs and external forces evolve.  
1.3.2 Critical Data 
Most organizations have a lot of data, not all of which is of equal importance. One principle of Data Quality Management is to focus improvement efforts on data th at is most important to the organization and its 
customers. Doing so gives the program scope and focus and enables it to make a direct, measurable impact on business needs.  
While specific drivers for criticality will differ by industry, there are common c haracteristics across 
organizations. Data can be assessed based on whether it is required by : 
•Regulatory reporting
•Financial reporting
•Business policy
•Ongoing operations
•Business strategy, especially efforts at competitive differentiation
Master Data is critical by definition. Data sets or individual data elements can be assessed for criticality based 
on the processes that consume them, the nature of the reports they appear in, or the financial, regulatory, or reputational risk to the organization if so mething were to go wrong with the data.
73  
1.3.3 Data Quality Dimensions  
A Data Quality dimension is a measurable feature or characteristic of data. The term dimension is used to make 
the connection to dimen sions in the measurement of physical objects (e.g., length, width, height). Data quality 
dimensions provide a vocabulary for defining data quality requirements. From there, they can be used to define results of initial data quality assessment as well as on going measurement. In order to measure the quality of 
data, an organization needs to establish characteristics that are both important to business processes (worth measuring) and measurable. Dimensions provide a basis for measurable rules, which themselves  should be 
directly connected to potential risks in critical processes.  
73 See Jugulum (2014), Chapters 6 and 7 for an approach to rationalizing critical data . 
 
Para verificar as assinaturas, acesse www.tcu.gov.br/autenticidade e informe o código 79193014.

--- Página 7 ---
DATA QUALITY  • 455  
For example, if the data in the customer email address field is incomplete, then we will not be able to send 
product information to our customers via email, and we will lose potential sales. Therefore, we will measure the 
percentage of customers for whom we have usable email addresses, and we will improve our processes until we have a usable email address for at least 98% of our customers.  
Many leading thinkers in data quality have published sets of dimensions.
74 The three most influential are 
described here because they provide insight into how to think about what it means to have high quality data, as 
well as into how data quality can be measured.  
The Strong- Wang framework  (1996) focuses on data consumers’ perceptions of data. It describes 15 
dimensions across four general categories of data quality:  
•Intrinsic DQ
oAccuracy
oObjectivity
oBelievability
oReputation
•Contextual DQ
oValue -added
oRelevancy
oTimeliness
oCompleteness
oAppropriate amount of data
•Representational DQ
oInterpretability
oEase of understanding
oRepresentational consistency
oConcise representation
•Accessibility DQ
oAccessibility
oAccess security
In Data Quality for the Information Age  (1996), Thomas  Redman formulated a set of data quality dimension 
rooted in data structure.75 Redman defines a data item as a “representable triple”: a value from the domain of an 
attribute within an entity. Dimensions can be associated with any of the component pieces of  data – the model 
(entities and attributes) as well as the values. Redman includes the dimension of representation, which he defines as a set of rules for recording data items. Within these three general categories (data model, data values, representation) , he describes more than two dozen dimensions. They include the following:  
74 In addition to the examples detailed here and numerous academic papers on this topic, see Loshin (2001), Olson (2003), 
McGilvray (2008), and Sebastian -Coleman (2013) for detailed discussions on data quality dimensions. See Myers (2013) for 
a comparison of dimensions.  
75 Redman expanded and revised his set of dimensions in Data Quality: The Field Gui de (2001). 
 
Para verificar as assinaturas, acesse www.tcu.gov.br/autenticidade e informe o código 79193014.

--- Página 8 ---
456 • DMBOK2  
Data Model : 
•Content:
oRelevance of dat a
oT
he ability to obtain the values
oClarity of definitions
•Level of deta il:
oA
ttribute granularity
oPrecision of attribute domains
•Composition:
oNaturalness: The idea that each attribute should have a simple counterpart in the real world
and that each attribute should bear on a single fact about the entity
oIdentify -ability: Each entity should be distinguishable from every other entity
oHomogeneity
oMinimum necessary redundancy
•Consistency:
oSemantic consistency of the components of the model
oStructure consistency of attributes across entity types
•Reaction to change:
oRobustness
oFlexibility
Data Values : 
•Accuracy
•Completeness
•Currency
•Consistency
Representation : 
•Appropriateness
•Interpretability
•Portability
•Format precision
•Format flexibility
•Ability to represent null values
•Efficient use of storage
•Physical instances of data being in accord with their formats
Redman recognizes that consistency of entities, values, and representation can be understood in terms of constraints. Different types of consistency are subject to different kinds of constraints.  
 
Para verificar as assinaturas, acesse www.tcu.gov.br/autenticidade e informe o código 79193014.

--- Página 9 ---
DATA QUALITY  • 457  
In Improving Data Warehouse and Business Information Quality (1999) , Larry English  presents a 
comprehensive set of dimensions divided into two broad categories: inherent and pragmatic.76 Inherent 
characteristics are independent of data use. Pragmatic characteristics are associated with data presentation and 
are dynamic; their value (quality) can change depending on the uses of data.  
•Inherent  quality characteristics
oDefinitional conformance
oCompleteness of values
oValidity or business rule conformance
oAccuracy to a surrogate source
oAccuracy to reality
oPrecision
oNon-duplication
oEquivalence of redundant or distributed data
oConcurrency of redundant or distributed data
•Pragmatic  quality characteristics
oAccessibility
oTimeliness
oContextual clarity
oUsability
oDerivation integrity
oRightness or fact completeness
In 2013, DAMA UK produced a white paper describing six core dimensions of data quality:  
•Completeness : The proportion of data stored against the potential for 100%.
•Uniqueness: No entity instance (thing) will be recorded more than once based upon how that thing isidenti fied.
•Timeliness : The degree to which data represent reality from the required point in time.
•Validity : Data is valid if it conforms to the syntax (format, type, range) of its definition.
•Accuracy : The degree to which data correctly describes the ‘real world’ object or event being
described.
•Consistency : The absence of difference, when comparing two or more representations of a thing
against a definition.
The DAMA UK white paper also describes other characteristics that have an impact on quality. While th e white 
paper does not call these dimensions, they work in a manner similar to Strong and Wang’s contextual and representational DQ and English’s pragmatic characteristics.  
•Usability : Is the data understandable, simple, relevant, accessible, maintainable and at the right level
of precision?
76 English expanded and revised his dimensions in Information Quality Applied (2009). 
 
Para verificar as assinaturas, acesse www.tcu.gov.br/autenticidade e informe o código 79193014.

--- Página 10 ---
458 • DMBOK2  
•Timing issues (beyond timeliness itself): Is it stable yet responsive to legitimate change requests?
•Flexibility : Is the data comparable and com patible with other data? Does it have useful groupings and
classifications? Can it be repurposed? Is it easy to manipulate?
•Confidence : Are Data Governance, Data Protection, and Data Security processes in place? What is th e
r
eputation of the data, and is it verified or verifiable?
•Value : Is there a good cost / benefit case for the data? Is it being optimally used? Does it endanger
people’s safety or privacy, or the legal responsibilities of the enterprise? Does it support or contradict
the corporate image or the corporate message?
While there is not a single, agreed -to set of data quality dimensions, these formulations contain common ideas. 
Dimensions include some characteristics that can be measured objectively (completeness, validity, format conformity)  and others that depend on heavily context or on subjective interpretation (usability, reliability, 
reputation). Whatever names are used, dimensions focus on whether there is enough data (completeness), whether it is right (accuracy, validity), how well it fits together (consistency, integrity, uniqueness), whether it 
is up -to-date (timeliness), accessible, usable, and secure. Table 29 contains definitions of a set of data quality 
dimensions, about which there is general agreement and describes approaches to measuring them.  
Table 29 Common Dimensions of Data Quality  
Dimension of 
Quality  Description  
Accuracy  Accuracy refers to the degree that data correctly represents ‘real -life’ entities.  Accuracy is difficult 
to measure, unless an organization can reproduce data collection or manually confirm accuracy of 
records. Most measures of accuracy rely on comparison to a data source that has been verified as accurate, such as a system of record or data from a reliable source (e.g., Dun and  Bradstreet 
Reference Data).  
Completeness  Completeness refers to whether all required data is present. Completeness can be measured at the 
data set, record, or column level. Does the data set contain all the records expected? Are records populated correctly? (Records with different statuses may have different expectations for 
completeness.) Are columns/attributes populated to the level  expected? (Some columns are 
mandatory. Optional columns are populated only under specific conditions.) Assign completeness 
rules to a data set with varying levels of constraint: Mandatory attributes that require a value, data elements with conditional and  optional values, and inapplicable attribute values. Data set level 
measurements may require comparison to a source of record or may be based on historical levels 
of population.  
Consistency  Consistency can refer to ensuring that data values are consisten tly represented within a data set 
and between data sets, and consistently associated across data sets. It can also refer to the size and composition of data sets between systems or acro ss time. Consistency may be defined between 
one set of attribute values  and another attribute set within the same record (record -level 
consistency), between one set of attribute values and another attribute set in different records (cross -record consistency), or between one set of attribute values and the same attribute set w ithin 
the same record at different points in time (temporal consistency). Consistency can also be used to refer to consistency of format. Take care not to confuse consistency with accuracy or correctness.  
Characteristics that are expected to be consistent  within and across data sets can be used as the 
basis for standardizing data. Data Standardization refers to the conditioning of input data to ensure that data meets rules for content and format. Standardizing data enables more effective matching and facil itates consistent output.  Encapsulate consistency constraints as a set of rules that specify 
consistent relationships between values of attributes, either across a record or message, or along all values of a single attribute (such as a range or list of val id values). For example, one might 
expect that the number of transactions each day does not exceed 105% of the running average 
number of transact ions for the previous 30 days.  
 
Para verificar as assinaturas, acesse www.tcu.gov.br/autenticidade e informe o código 79193014.

--- Página 11 ---
DATA QUALITY  • 459  
Dimension of 
Quality  Description  
Integrity  Data Integrity (or Coherence) includes ideas associated with complet eness, accuracy, and 
consistency. In data, integrity usually refers to either referential integrity (consistency between 
data objects via a reference key contained in both objects) or internal consistency within a data set such that there are no holes or m issing parts. Data sets without integrity are seen as corrupted, or 
have data loss. Data sets without referential integrity have ‘orphans’ – invalid reference keys, or 
‘duplicates’ – identical rows which may negatively affect aggregation functions. The level of 
orphan records can be measured as a raw count or as  a percentage of the data set.  
Reasonability  Reasonabi lity asks whether a data pattern meets expectations. For example, whether a distribution 
of sales across a geographic area makes sense based on what is known about the customers in that area. Measurement of reasonability can take different forms. For example, reasonability may be based on comparison to benchmark data, or past instances of a similar data set (e.g., sales from the previous quarter). Some ideas about reasonability may be perceived as subjective. If this is the 
case, work with data consumers to  articulate the basis of their expectations of data to formulate 
objective comparisons. Once benchmark measurements of reasonability are established, these can 
be used to objectively compare new instances of the same data set in order to detect change. (Se e 
Section 4.5.)  
Timeliness  The concept of data Timeliness refers to several characteristics of data. Measures of timeliness 
need to be understood in terms of expected volatility – how frequently data is likely to change and 
for what reasons. Data currency is the measure of whether data values are the most up- to-date 
version of the information. Relatively static data, for example some Reference Data values like country codes, may remain current for a long period. Volatile data remains current for a short period. Some data, for example, stock prices on financial web pages, will often be shown with an as-of-time, so that data consumers understand the risk that the data has changed since it was 
recorded. During the day, while the markets are open, such data will be updated frequently. Once 
markets close, the data will remain unchanged, but will still be current, since the market itself is 
inactive. Latency measures the time between when the data was created and when it was made available for use. For example, overnight batch processing can give a latency of 1 day at 8am for data entered into the system during the prior day, but only one hour for data generated during the 
batch processing . (See Chapter 8 .) 
Uniqueness / 
Deduplication Uniqueness states that  no entity exists more than once within the data set. Asserting uniqueness of 
the entities within a data set implies that a key value relates to each unique entity, and only that 
specific entity, within the data set. Measure uniqueness by testing against k ey structure . (See 
Chapter  5.) 
Validity  Validity refers to whether data values are consistent with a defined domain of values. A domain of 
values may be a defined set of valid values (such as in a reference table), a range of values, or 
value that can be determined via rules. The data type, format, and precision of expected values must be accounted for in defining the domain. Data may also only be valid for a specific length of time, for example data that is generated from RFID (radio frequency ID) or some scientific data 
sets. Validate data by comparing it to domain constraints. Keep in mind that data may be valid 
(i.e., it may meet domain requirements) and still not be accurate or correctly associated with 
particular records.  
Figure 92 aligns data quality dimensions and concepts associated with those dimensions. The arrows indicate 
significant overlaps between concepts and also demonstrate that there is not agreement on a specific set. For 
example, the dimension of accuracy is associated with ‘agrees with real world’ and ‘match to agreed source’ 
and also to the concepts associated with validity, such as ‘derivation correct’.  
 
Para verificar as assinaturas, acesse www.tcu.gov.br/autenticidade e informe o código 79193014.

--- Página 12 ---
460 • DMBOK2  
Figure 92 Relationship Between Data Quality Dimensions77 
77 Adapted from Myers (2013), used with permission. PRECISION
ACCURACY
COMPLETENESS
CONSISTENCY
CURRENCY
DATA INTEGRITY
PRIVACY
REASONABLENESS
TIMELINESS
UNIQUENESSAgrees with Real World
Match to Agreed Source
Row Populated
Column Populated
Schema Populated
Logical Consistency
Concurrence of Distributed Data
Current with WorldTable Populated
Unique ID of Entity
Cardinality
Data Referential Integrity
Precision of Data Values
Data Sufficient to Complete a Given Task
Adherence to Controls
Consistency within Operational Task
Regarded as True and Credible
Expectation of Availability
Manual & Electronic Float
Element Uniqueness with DatasetDimension
VALIDITYEntity Uniqueness with Dataset
Controlled Redundancy
Valid Values Control
Derivation Correct
Values Conform to Business Rules
Values Conform to Other Datatype SpecificationsConcepts
Equivalence of Redundant or Distributed Data
ACCESSIBILITY
Ease of Obtaining Data
Access Control
Retention
 
Para verificar as assinaturas, acesse www.tcu.gov.br/autenticidade e informe o código 79193014.

--- Página 13 ---
DATA QUALITY  • 461  
1.3.4 Data Quality and Metadata  
Metadata is critical to managing the quality of data. The quality of data is based on how well it meets the 
requirem ents of data consumers. Metadata defines what the data represents. Having a robust process by which 
data is defined supports the ability of an organization to formalize and document the standards and requirements 
by which the quality of data can be measured. Data quality is about meeting expectations. Metadata is a primary means of clarifying expectations.  
Well- managed Metadata can also support the effort to improve the quality of data. A Metadata repository can 
house results of data quality measurements so that these are shared across the organization and the Data Quality team can work toward consensus about priorities and drivers for improvement. (S ee Chapter  12.) 
1.3.5 Data Quality ISO Standard  
ISO 8000, the international standard for data quality , is being developed to enable the exchange of complex data 
in an application -neutral form. In the introduction to the standard, ISO asserts: “ The ability to create, collect, 
store, main tain, transfer, process and present data to support business processes in a timely and cost effective 
manner requires both an understanding of the characteristics of the data that determine its quality, and an ability to measure, manage and report on data quality. ” 
ISO 8000 defines characteristics that can be tested by any organization in the data supply chain to objectively determine conformance of the data to ISO 8000.
78 
The first published part of ISO 8000 (part 110, published in 2008) focused on the synt ax, semantic encoding, 
and conformance to the data specification of Master Data. Other parts projected for the standard include part 
100 - Introduction, part 120 - Provenance, part 130 - Accuracy, and part 140 - Completeness.79 
ISO defines quality data as “p ortable data that meets stated requirements.”80 The data quality standard is related 
to the ISO’s overall work on data portability and preservation. Data is considered ‘portable’ if it can be separated from a software application. Data that can only be used  or read using a specific licensed  software 
application is subject to the terms of the software license. An organization may not be able to use data it created unless that data can be detached from the software that was used to create it.  
To meet stated re quirements requires that these requirements be defined in a clear, unambiguous manner. ISO 
8000 is supported through ISO 22745, a standard for defining and exchanging Master Data. ISO 22745 defines how data requirement statements should be constructed, pro vides examples in XML , and defines a format for 
78 http://bit.ly/2ttdiZJ . 
79 http://bit.ly/2sANGdi.  
80 http://bit.ly/2rV1oWC . 
 
Para verificar as assinaturas, acesse www.tcu.gov.br/autenticidade e informe o código 79193014.

--- Página 14 ---
462 • DMBOK2  
the exchange of encoded data.81 ISO 22745 creates portable data by labeling the data using an ISO 22745 
compliant Open Technical Dictionary such as the ECCMA Open Technical Dictionary (eOTD).  
The intention of  ISO 8000 is to help organizations define what is and is not quality data, enable them to ask for 
quality data using standard conventions, and verify that they have received quality data using those same 
standards.  When standards are followed, requirements can be confirmed through a computer program.  
ISO 8000 - Part 61 Information and  data quality management process reference model is under development.82 
This standard will describe the structure and organization of data quality management, including:  
•Data Q uality Planning
•Data Quality Control
•Data Quality Assurance
•Data Quality Improvement
1.3.6 Data Quality Improvement Lifecycle  
Most approaches to improving data quality  are based on the techniques of quality improvement in  the 
manufacture of physical products.83 In this paradigm, data is understood as the product of a set of processes. At 
its simplest, a process is defined as a series of steps that turns inputs into outputs. A process that creates data may consist of one -step (data collection) or many steps: data collection, integration into a data warehouse, 
aggregation in a data mart, etc. At any step, data can be negatively affected. It can be collected incorrectly, dropped or duplicated between systems, aligned or aggregated incorrectly, etc. Improving data quality requires the ability to assess the relationship between inputs and outputs, in order to ensure that inputs meet the requirements of the process and that outputs conform to expectations . Since outputs from one process become 
inputs to other processes, requirements must be defined along the whole data chain.  
A general approach to data quality improvement, shown in Figure 93, is a version of the Shewhart / Deming 
cycle .
84 Based on the scientific method, the Shewhart / Deming cycle is a problem -solving model known as 
‘plan -do-check -act’. Improvement comes through a defined set of steps. The condition of data must be 
measured against standards and, if it does not meet standards, root cause(s) of the discrepancy from standards 
must be identified and remediated. Root causes may be found in any of the steps of the process, technical or non-technical. Once remediated, data should be monitored to ensure that it continues to meet r equirements.  
81 http://bit.ly/2rUZyoz . 
82 http://bit.ly/2sVik3Q . 
83 See Wang (1998), English (1999), Redman (2001), Loshin (2001), and McGilvray (2008). See Pierce (2004) for an 
overview of literature related to the concept of data as a product.  
84 See American Society for Quality: http://bit.ly/1le lyBK  Plan-Do-Check -Act was originated by Walter Shewhart and 
popularized by W. Edwards Deming. 6 Sigma’s Measure, Analyze, Improve, Control (DMAIC) is a variation on this cycle.  
 
Para verificar as assinaturas, acesse www.tcu.gov.br/autenticidade e informe o código 79193014.

--- Página 15 ---
DATA QUALITY  • 463  
Figure 93 The Shewhart Chart  
For a given data set, a Data Quality Management cycle begins by identifying the data that does not meet data 
consumers’ requirements and data issues that are obstacles to the achievement of business objectives. Data needs to be assessed against key dimensions of quality and known business requirements. Root causes of issues will need to be identified so that stakeholders can understand the costs of remediation and the risks of not remedi ating the issues. This work is often done in conjunction with Data Stewards and other stakeholders.  
In the Plan  stage, the Data Quality team assesses the scope, impact, and priority of known issues, and evaluates 
alternatives to address them. This plan sh ould be based on a solid foundation of analysis of the root causes of 
issues. From knowledge of the causes and the impact of the issues, cost / benefit can be understood, priority can be determined, and a basic plan can be formulated to address them.  
In the Do stage, the DQ team leads efforts to address the root causes of issues and plan for ongoing monitoring 
of data. For root causes that are based on non -technical processes, the DQ team can work with process owners 
to implement changes. For root causes t hat require technical changes, the DQ team should work with technical 
teams to ensure that requirements are implemented correctly and that technical changes do not introduce errors. 
The Check stage involves actively monitoring the quality of data as measur ed against requirements. As long as 
data meets defined thresholds for quality, additional actions are not required. The processes will be considered under control and meeting business requirements. However, if the data falls below acceptable quality thresholds, then additional action must be taken to bring it up to acceptable levels.  
The Act stage is for activities to address and resolve emerging data quality issues. The cycle restarts, as the 
causes of issues are assessed and solutions proposed. Continuous  improvement is achieved by starting a new 
cycle. New cycles begin as:  
•Existing measurements fall below thresholds
•New data sets come under investigation
•New data quality requirements emerge for existing data sets
•Business rules, standards, or expectations  change
PLAN DO
ACT CHECK
 
Para verificar as assinaturas, acesse www.tcu.gov.br/autenticidade e informe o código 79193014.

--- Página 16 ---
464 • DMBOK2  
The cost of getting data right the first time is cheaper than the costs from getting data wrong and fixing it later. 
Building quality into the data management processes from the beginning costs less than retrofitting it. 
Maintaining high quality da ta throughout the data lifecycle is less risky than trying to improve quality in an 
existing process. It also creates a far lower impact on the organization. Establishing criteria for data quality at the beginning of a process or system build is one sign o f a mature Data Management Organization. Doing so 
takes governance and discipline, as well as cross -functional collaboration.  
1.3.7 Data Quality Business Rule Types 
Business rules describe how business should operate internally, in order to be successful a nd compliant with the 
outside world. Data Quality Business Rules  describe how data should exist in order to be useful and usable 
within an organization. These rules can be aligned with dimensions of qua lity and used to describe data quality 
requirements. For example, a business rule that all state code fields must comply with the US State Abbreviations can be enforced by data entry pick lists and data integration lookups. The level of valid or invalid records can then be measured.  
Business rules are commonly implemented in software, or by using document templates for data entry. Some common simple business rule types are:  
•Definitional conformance : Confirm that the same understanding of data definitions is implemented
and used properly in processes across the organization. Confirmation includes algorithmic agreementon calculated fields, including any time, or local constraints, and rollup and status interdependen
ce
r
ules.
•Value presence and record completeness : Rules defining the conditions under which missing values
are acceptable or unacceptable.
•Format compliance : One or more patterns specify values assigned to a data element, such as
standards for formatting telephone numbers.
•Value domain membership: Specify that a data element’s assigned value is included in thos e
en
umerated in a defined data value domain, such as 2 -Character United States Postal Codes for  a
S
TATE field.
•Range conformance : A data element assigned value must be within a defined numeric, lexicographic,
or time range, such as greater than 0 and less than 100 for a numeric range.
•Mapping conformance : Indicating that the value assigned to a data element must correspond to on e
s
elected from a value domain that maps to other equivalent corres ponding value domain(s). The
STATE data domain again provides a good example, since S tate values may be represented using
different value domains (USPS Postal codes, FIPS 2 -digit codes, full names), and these types of rules
validate that ‘AL’ and ‘01’ both  map to ‘Alabama.’
 
Para verificar as assinaturas, acesse www.tcu.gov.br/autenticidade e informe o código 79193014.

--- Página 17 ---
DATA QUALITY  • 465  
•Consistency rules : Conditional assertions that refer to maintaining a relationship between two (or
more) attributes based on the actual values of those attributes. For example, address validation wher e
p
ostal codes correspond to particul ar States or P rovinces.
•Accuracy verification : Compare a data value against a corresponding value in a system of record or
other verified source (e.g., marketing data purchased from a vendor) to verify that the values match.
•Uniqueness verification: Rules that specify which entities must have a unique representation and
whether one and only one record exists for each represented real world object.
•Timeliness validation : Rules that indicate the characteristics associated with expectations for
accessibility and availability of data.
Other types of rules may involve aggregating functions applied to sets of data instances  (see Section 4.5) . 
Examples of aggregation checks include:  
•Validate reasonableness of the number of records in a file. This requires keeping s tatistics over time to
generate trends.
•Validate reasonableness of an average amount calculated from a set of transactions. This requiresestablishing thresholds for comparison, and may be based on statistics over time.
•Validate the expected variance in the count of transactions over a specified timeframe. This requireskeeping statistics over time and using them to establish thresholds.
1.3.8 Common Causes of Data Quality Issues 
Data quality issues  can emerge at any point in the data lifecycle, from creation to disposal. When investigating 
root causes, analysts should look for potential culprits, like problems with data entry, data processing, system design, and manual intervention in automated pro cesses. Many issues will have multiple causes and 
contributing factors (especially if people have created ways to work around them). These causes of issues also imply ways to prevent issues: through improvement to interface design, testing of data quality rules as part of processing, a focus on data quality within system design, and strict controls on manual intervention in automated processes.  
1.3.8.1 Issues C aused by Lack of Leadership  
Many people assume that most data quality issues  are caused by data entry errors. A more sophisticated 
understanding recognizes that gaps in or poor execution of business and technical processes cause many more problems than mis -keying. However, common sense sa ys and research indicates that many data quality 
problems are caused by a lack of organizational commitment to high quality data, which itself stems from a lack of leadership, in the form of both governance and management.  
 
Para verificar as assinaturas, acesse www.tcu.gov.br/autenticidade e informe o código 79193014.

--- Página 18 ---
466 • DMBOK2  
Every organization has informati on and data assets that are of value to its operations. Indeed, the operations of 
every organization depend on the ability to share information. Despite this, few organizations manage these 
assets with rigor. Within most organizations, data disparity (diff erences in data structure, format, and use of 
values) is a larger problem than just simple errors; it can be a major obstacle to the integration of data. One of the reasons data stewardship programs focus on defining terms and consolidating the language around data is because that is the starting point for getting to more consistent data.  
Many governance and information asset programs are driven solely by compliance, rather than by the potential 
value to be derived from data as an asset. A lack of recognition on the part of leadership means a lack of commitment within an organization to managing data as an asset, including managing its quality (Evans and  
Price, 2012). (See Figure 94.)  
Barriers to effective management of data quality include:
85 
•Lack of awareness on the part of leadership and staff
•Lack of business governance
•Lack of leadership and management
•Difficulty in justification of improvements
•Inappropriate or ineffective instruments to measure value
These barriers have negative effects on customer experience, productivity, morale, organizational effectiveness, revenue, and competitive advantage. They increase costs of running the organization and introduce risks as well. (See Chapter 11.)  
1.3.8.2 Issues Caused by Data Entry Processes  
•Data entry interface issues : Poorly designed data entry  interfaces can contribute to data quality
issues. If a data entry interface does not have edits or controls to prevent incorrect data from being putin the system data processors are likely to take shortcuts, such as skipping non -mandatory fields an
d
f
ailing to update defaulted fields.
•List entry placement : Even simple features of data entry interfaces, such as the order of values within
a drop- down list, can contribute  to data entry errors.
•Field overloading : Some organizations re- use fields over time for different business purposes rather
than making changes to the data model and user interface. This practice results in inconsistent andconfusing population of the fie lds.
•Training issues : Lack of process knowledge can lead to incorrect data entry, even if controls and edits
are in place. If data processors are not aware of the impact of incorrect data or if they are incented forspeed, rather than accuracy, they are li kely to make choices based on drivers other than the quality of
the data.
85 Adapted from The Leader’s Data Manifesto . https://dataleaders.org/ . 
 
Para verificar as assinaturas, acesse www.tcu.gov.br/autenticidade e informe o código 79193014.

--- Página 19 ---
DATA QUALITY  • 467  
Figure 94 Barriers to Managing Information as a Business A sset86 
• Changes to business processes : Business processes change over time, and with these change s new
b
usiness rules and data quality requirements are introduced. However, business rule changes are not
always incorporated into systems in a timely manner or comprehensively. Data errors will result if an
interface is not upgraded to accommodate new or changed requirements. In addition, data is likely tobe impacted unless changes to business rules are propagated throughout the entire system.
86 Diagram developed by Danette McGilvray, James Price, and Tom Redman. Used by permission. https://dataleaders.org/. Lack of accountability
Lack of ownership
Unclear who is 
responsible for what
No 
tertiary 
education
No on -
the-job 
education
Fail to invest in quality, adding cost 
and complicating efforts to use dataLack the ability to do the work
Inappropriate structure (e.g. silos 
impede sharing)
Confused about “who does what”
Pro-active leadership missing.  
Lack:   
•Vision
•Strategy
•Policy
•Guiding Principles
•Management SystemCost of managing information 
assets is not understood
Value from data depends on 
context and is difficult to pin down
Benefits are hard to derive 
Business Cases don’t create a 
sense of urgency
Information management 
tools are not understood
Language is impreciseDon’t know how to put 
information to work 
Inappropriate culture (e.g. intuition 
valued over the “facts”, information not 
valued as asset)
Lack the equivalent of GAAPSoftware seen as a panacea/ 
confusion about IT vs. dataLack measurement to 
guide actionMarkets don’t demand 
they do so
Accounting principles don’t 
allow capitalisation of 
information assetsLack of Business 
Governance 
© 2017 dataleaders.org
Used with permission
Barriers that slow/hinder/prevent 
companies from managing their 
information as a business asset
Most commonly observed root causes
Danette McGilvray / James Price / Tom Redman
October 2016
Work based on research by Dr.Nina Evans and James Price, see 
“Barriers to the Effective Deployment of Information Assets” at
www.dataleaders.orgDifficulty in 
Justification
Information 
Assets Not 
Properly 
ManagedLack of 
Awareness
•Executive
•Practitioner
Lack of 
Leadership and 
ManagementInappropriate or 
ineffective 
InstrumentsCustomer 
Experience
Organisation  
Alacrity 
Revenue
Competitive 
Advantage
Productivity
Costs 
Risk
•Continuity
•Compliance
•Discovery
•Security
 
Para verificar as assinaturas, acesse www.tcu.gov.br/autenticidade e informe o código 79193014.

--- Página 20 ---
468 • DMBOK2  
•Inconsistent business process execution : Data created through processes that are executed
inconsistently is like ly to be inconsistent. Inconsistent execution may be due to training or
documentation issues as well as to changing requirements.
1.3.8.3 Issues Caused by Data Processing Functions  
•Incorrect assumptions about data sources : Production issues  can occur due to errors or changes,
inadequate or obsolete system documentation, or inadequate knowledge transfer (for example, when
SMEs leave without documenting their knowledge). System consolidation acti vities, such as those
associated with mergers and acquisitions, are often based on limited knowledge about the relationshipbetween systems. When multiple source systems and data feeds need to be integrated there is always
 a
r
isk that details will be misse d, especially with varying levels of source knowledge available and tight
timelines.
•Stale business rules : Over time, business rules change. They should be periodically reviewed and
updated. If there is automated measurement of rules, the technical process  for measuring rules shoul d
a
lso be updated. If it is not updated, issues may not be identified or false positives will be produced (or
both).
•Changed data structures : Source systems may change structures without informing downstream
consumers (both human and system) or without providing sufficient time to account for the changes.This can result in invalid values or other conditions that prevent data movement and loading, or i
n
m
ore subtle changes that may not be detected immediately.
1.3.8.4 Issues Caused  by System Design  
•Failure to enforce referential integrity : Referential integrity is necessary to ensure high quality dat a
a
t an application or system level. If referential integrity is not enforced or if validation is switched off
(for example, to improve response times), various data quality issues can arise:
oDuplicate data that breaks uniqueness rules
oOrphan rows, which can be included in some reports and excluded from others, leading tomultiple v alues for the sam e calculation
oInability to upgrade due to restored or changed referential integrity requirements
oInaccurate data due to missing data being assigned default values
•Failure to enforce uniqueness constraints : Multiple copies of data instances within a table or file
expected to contain unique instances. If there are insufficient checks for uniqueness of instances, or ifthe unique constraints are turned off in the database to improve performance, data aggregation resultscan be overstated.
 
Para verificar as assinaturas, acesse www.tcu.gov.br/autenticidade e informe o código 79193014.

--- Página 21 ---
DATA QUALITY  • 469  
•Coding inaccuracies a nd gaps : If the data mapping or layout is incorrect, or the rules for processing
the data are not accurate, the data processed will have data quality issues, ranging from incorrect
calculations to data being assigned to or linked to improper fields, keys, or relationships.
•Data model inaccuracies : If assumptions within the data model are not supported by the actual data,
there will be data quality issues ranging from data loss due to field lengths being exceeded by th e
act
ual data, to data being assigned to  improper IDs or keys.
•Field overloading : Re-use of fields over time for different purposes, rather than changing the data
model or code can result in confusing sets of values, unclear meaning, and potentially, structuralproblems, like incorrectly assigned keys.
•Temporal data mismatches : In the absence of a consolidated data dictionary, multiple systems could
implement disparate date formats or timings, which in turn lead to data mismatch and data loss whendata synchronization takes place between different source systems.
•Weak Master Data Management : Immature Master Data Management can lead to choosing
unreliable sources for data, which can cause data quality issues that are very difficult to find until th
e
as
sumption that the data source is accurate is d isproved.
•Data duplication : Unnecessary data duplication is often a result of poor data management. There ar e
t
wo main types of undesirable duplication issues:
oSingle Source – Multiple Local Instances : For example, instances of the same customer in
multiple (similar or identical) tables in the same database. Knowing which instance is th e
m
ost accurate for use can be difficult without system -specific knowledge.
oMultiple Sources – Single Instance : Data instances with multiple authoritative sources or
systems of record. For example, single customer instances coming from multiple point -of-sale
s
ystems. When processing this data for use, there can be duplicate temporary storage areas.
Merge rules determine which source has priority over others when processing int o permanent
production data areas.
1.3.8.5 Issues Caused by Fixing Issues 
Manual data patches  are changes made directly on the data in the database, not through the business rules in  the 
application interfaces or processing. These are scripts or manual commands generally created in a hurry and used to ‘fix’ data in an emergency such as intentional injection of bad data, lapse in security, internal fraud, or external source for busines s disruption.  
Like any untested code, they have a high risk of causing further errors through unintended consequences, by changing more data than required, or not propagating the patch to all historical data affected by the original issue. Most such patches also change the data in place, rather than preserving the prior state and adding corrected rows.  
 
Para verificar as assinaturas, acesse www.tcu.gov.br/autenticidade e informe o código 79193014.

--- Página 22 ---
470 • DMBOK2  
These changes are generally NOT undo -able without a complete restore from backup as there is only the 
database log to show the changes. Therefore, these shortcuts are strongly discouraged – they are opportunities 
for security breaches and business disruption longer than a proper correction would cause. All changes should 
go through a governed change management process.  
1.3.9 Data Profiling  
Data Profiling  is a form of data analysis used to inspect data and assess quality. Data profiling uses statistical 
techniques to discover the true structure, content, and quality of a collection of data (Olson, 2003). A profi ling 
engine produces statistics that analysts can use to identify patterns in data content and structure. For example:  
•Counts of nulls : Identifies nulls exist and allows for inspection of whether they are allowable or not
•Max/Min v alue: Identifies outliers, like negatives
•Max/Min length: Identifies outliers or invalids for fields with specific length requirements
•Frequency distribution of values for individual columns: Enables assessment of reasonability (e.g.,
distribution of country codes for transactions, inspection of frequently or infrequently occurring values,as well as the percentage of the records populated with defaulted values)
•Data type and format : Identifies level of non -conformance to format requirements, as well as
identification of unexpected formats (e.g., number of decimals, embedded spaces, sample values)
Profiling also includes cross -column analysis, which can identif y overlapping or duplicate columns and expose 
embedded value dependencies. Inter -table analysis explores overlapping values sets and helps identify foreign 
key relationships. Most data profiling tools allow for drilling down into the analyzed data for further investigation.   
Results from the profiling engine must be assessed by an analyst to determine whether data conforms to rules and other requirements. A good analyst can use profiling results to confirm known relationships and uncover hidden characterist ics and patterns within and between data sets, including business rules, and validity 
constraints. Profiling is usually used as part of data discovery for projects (especially data integration projects; see Chapter 8) or to assess the current state of data that is targeted for improvement. Results of data profiling 
can be used to identify opportunities to improve the quality of both data and Metadata (Olson, 2003; Maydanchik, 2007).  
While profiling is an effective way to understand data, it is just a first step to data quality improvement. It enables organizations to identify potential problems. Solving problems requires other forms of analysis, including business process analysis, analysis of data lineage, and deeper data analysis that can help isolate root  
causes of problems.  
1.3.10 Data Quality and Data Processing  
While the focus of data quality improvement efforts is often on the prevention of errors, data quality can also be improved through some forms of data processing. (See  Chapter 8. )  
 
Para verificar as assinaturas, acesse www.tcu.gov.br/autenticidade e informe o código 79193014.

--- Página 23 ---
DATA QUALITY  • 471  
1.3.10.1 Data Cleansing  
Data Cleansing or Scrubbing transforms data to make it conform to data standards and domain rules. Cleansing 
includes detecting and correcting data errors to bring the quality of data to an acceptable level.  
It costs mon ey and introduces risk to continuously remediate data through cleansing. Ideally, the need for data 
cleansing should decrease over time, as root causes of data issues are resolved. The need for data cleansing can 
be addressed by:  
•Implementing controls to prevent data entry errors
•Correcting the data in the source system
•Improving the business processes that create the data
In some situations, correcting on an ongoing basis may be necessary, as re- processing the data in a midstream 
system is cheaper than a ny other alternative.  
1.3.10.2 Data Enhancement  
Data enhancement  or enrichment is the process of adding attributes to a data set to increase its quality and 
usability. Some enhancements are gained by integrating data sets internal to an organization. External data can also be purchased to enhance organizational data (see Chapter 10). Examples of data enhancement include:  
•Time/Date stamps : One way to improve data is to document the time and date that data items ar
e
cr
eated, modified, or retired, which can help to track historical data events. If issues are detected with
the data, timestamps can be very valuable in root cause analysis, because they enable analysts to isolat e
t
he timeframe of the issue.
•Audit data : Auditin g can document data lineage, which is important for historical tracking as well as
validation.
•Reference vocabularies : Business specific terminology, ontologies, and glossaries enhance
understanding and control while bringing customized business context.
•Contextual information : Adding context such as location, environment, or access methods and
tagging data for review and analysis.
•Geographic information : Geographic information can be enhanced through address standardization
and geocoding, which includes r egional coding, municipality, neighborhood mapping, latitude /
longitude pairs, or other kinds of location -based data.
•Demographic information : Customer data can be enhanced through demographic information, such
as age, marital status, gender, income, or ethnic coding. Business entity data can be associated withannual revenue, number of employees, size of occupied space, etc.
 
Para verificar as assinaturas, acesse www.tcu.gov.br/autenticidade e informe o código 79193014.

--- Página 24 ---
472 • DMBOK2  
•Psychographic information : Data used to segment the target populations by specific behaviors,
habits, or preferences, such as product and brand preferences, organization memberships, leisur e
a
ctivities, commuting transportation style, shopping time preferences, etc.
•Valuation information : Use this kind of enhancement for asset valuation, inventory, and sale.
1.3.10.3 Data Parsing and Formatting 
Data Parsing  is the process of analyzing data using pre -determined rules to define its content or value. Data 
parsing enables the data analyst to define sets of patterns that feed into a rule engine used to distinguish between 
valid and invalid data values. Matching specific pattern(s) triggers actions.  
Data parsing assigns characteristics to the data values appearing in a data instance, and those characteristics 
help in determining potential sources for added benefits. For example, if an attribute called ‘name’ can be determined to have values belonging to ‘business name’ embedded within it, then the data value is identified as the name of a business rather than the name of a person. Use the same approach for any situation in which data values organize into semantic hierarchies such as sub -parts, parts, and assemblies.  
Many data quality issues involve situations where variation in data values representing similar concepts introduces ambiguity. Extract and rearrange the separate components (commonly referred to as ‘tokens’) can be 
extracted and rearranged into a standard representation to create a valid pattern. When an invalid pattern is recognized, the application may attempt to transform the invalid value into one that meets the rules. Perform standardization by mapping data from some source pattern into a corresponding target representation.  
For example, consider the different ways telephone numbers expected to conform to a numbering plan are formatte d. While some have digits, some have alphabetic characters, and all use different special characters for 
separation. People can recognize each one as a telephone number. However, to determine if these numbers are accurate (perhaps by comparing them to a master customer directory), or to investigate whether duplicate numbers exist when there should be only one for each supplier, the values must be parsed into their component segments (area code, exchange, and line number) and then transformed into a standard format.  
Another good example is a customer name, since names may be represented in thousands of different forms. A good standardization tool will be able to parse the different components of a customer name, such as given name, middle name, family name, initials, titles, generational designations, and then rearrange those components into a canonical representation that other data services will be able to manipulate.  
The human ability to recognize familiar patterns contributes to an ability to characterize variant data values 
belonging to the same abstract class of values; people recognize different types of telephone numbers because they conform to frequently used patterns. An analyst describes the format patterns that all represent a data object, such as Person Name , Product Description , and so on. A data quality tool parses data values that 
conform to any of those patterns, and even transforms them into a single, standardized form that will simplify the assessment, similarity analysis, and remediation pro cesses. Pattern -based parsing can automate the 
recognition and subsequent standardization of meaningful value components.  
 
Para verificar as assinaturas, acesse www.tcu.gov.br/autenticidade e informe o código 79193014.

--- Página 25 ---
DATA QUALITY  • 473  
1.3.10.4 Data Transformation and Standardization  
During normal processing, data rules trigger and transform the data  into a format that is readable by the target 
architecture. However, readable does not always mean acceptable. Rules are created directly within a data 
integration stream, or rely on alternate technologies embedded in or accessi ble from within a tool.  
Data transformation builds on these types of standardization techniques. Guide rule -based transformations by 
mapping data values in their original formats and patterns into a target representation. Pars ed components of a 
pattern are subjected to rearrangement, corrections, or any changes as directed by the rules in the knowledge base. In fact, standardization is a special case of transformation, employing rules that capture context, linguistics, and idio ms recognized as common over time, through repeated analysis by the rules analyst or tool 
vendor. (See Chapter 3.)  
2.Activities
2.1 Define High Quality Data  
Many people recognize poor quality data when they see it. Fewer are able to define what they mean by high 
quality data. Alternatively, they define it in very general term: “The data has to be right.” “We need accurate data.” High quality data is fit for the purposes of data consumers. Before launching a Data Qual ity program, it is 
beneficial to understand business needs, define terms, identify organizational pain points, and start to build consensus about the drivers and priorities for data quality improvement. Ask a set of questions to understand current state and assess organizational readiness for data quality improvement :  
•What do stakeholders mean by ‘high quality data’?
•What is the impact of low quality data on business operations and strategy?
•How will higher quality data enable business strategy?
•What priorities drive the need for data quality improvement?
•What is the tolerance for poor quality data?
•What governance is in place to support data quality improvement?
•What additional governance structures will be needed?
Getting a comprehensive picture of the current state of data quality in an organization requires approaching the 
question from different perspectives:  
•An understanding of business strategy and goals
•Interviews with stakeholders to identify pain points, risks, and business drivers
•Direct asses sment of data, through profiling and other form of analysis
•Documentation of data dependencies in business processes
•Documentation of technical architecture and systems support for business processes
 
Para verificar as assinaturas, acesse www.tcu.gov.br/autenticidade e informe o código 79193014.

--- Página 26 ---
474 • DMBOK2  
This kind of assessment can reveal a significant number  of opportunities. These need to be prioritized based on 
the potential benefit to the organization. Using input from stakeholders, including Data Stewards and business 
and technical SMEs, the Data Quality team should define the meaning of data quality and propose program 
priorities.  
2.2 Define a Data Quality Strategy  
Improving data quality  requires a strategy that accounts for the work that needs to be done and the way people 
will execute it. Data quality priorities must align with business strategy. Adopting or developing a framework and methodology will help guide both strategy and tactics while providing a means to measure progress and impacts. A framework should include methods to:  
•Understand and prioritize business needs
•Identify the data critical to meeting business needs
•Define business rules and data quality standards based on busi ness requirements
•Assess data against expectations
•Share findings and get feedback from stakeholders
•Prioritize and manage issues
•Identify and prioritize opportunities for improvement
•Measure, monitor, and report on data quality
•Manage Metadata produced t hrough data quality processes
•Integrate data quality controls into business and technical processes
A framework should also account for how to organize for data quality and how to leverage data quality tools. 
As noted in the chapter introduction, improvin g data quality requires a Data Quality program team to engage 
business and technical staff and define a program of work that addresses critical issues, defines best practices, 
and puts in place operational processes that support ongoing management of data quality. Often such a team will be part of the Data Management Organization. DQ analysts will need to work closely with Data Stewards at all levels. They should also influence policy, including policy about business processes and systems development. However, such a team will not be able to solve all of an organization’s data quality challenges. DQ work and a commitment to high quality data need to become embedded in organizational practices. The DQ Strategy should account for how to extend best practices. ( See Chapter  17.) 
2.3 Identify Critical Data and Business Rules  
Not all data is of equal importance. Data Quality Management efforts should focus first on the most important 
data in the organization: data that, if it were of higher quality, would provide greater value to the organization 
and its customers. Data can be prioritized based on factors such as regulatory requirements, financial value, and direct impact on customers. Often, data quality improvement efforts start with Master Data, which is, by definition, among the most important data in any organization. The result of the importance analysis is a ranked list of data, which the Data Quality team can use to focus their work efforts.  
 
Para verificar as assinaturas, acesse www.tcu.gov.br/autenticidade e informe o código 79193014.

--- Página 27 ---
DATA QUALITY  • 475  
Having identified the critical data, Data Quality analysts need to identify business rules that describe or imply 
expectations about the quality characteristics of data. Often rules themselves are not explicitly documented. They may need to be reverse- engineered through analysis of existing business processes, workflows, 
regulations, policies, standards, system edits, software code, triggers and procedures, status code assignment and use, and plain old common sense. For example, if a marketing company wants to target efforts at peopl e in 
a specific demographic, then potential indexes of data quality might be the level and reasonability of population in demographic fields like birth date, age, gender, and household income.  
Most business rules  are associated with how data is collected or created, but data quality measurement centers 
around whether data is fit for use. The two (data creation and data use) are related. People want to use data because of what it represents and why it was created. For example, to understand an organization’s sales performance during a specific quarter or over time depends on having reliable data about the sales process (number and type of units sold, volume sold to existing customers vs. new customer s, etc.).  
It is not possible to know all the ways that data might be used, but it is possible to understand the process and rules by which data was created or collected. Measurements that describe whether data is fit for use should be developed in relation  to known uses and measurable rules based on dimensions of data quality: completeness, 
conformity, validity, integrity, etc. that provide the basis for meaningful metrics. Dimensions of quality enable analysts to characterize both rules (field X is mandato ry and must be populated) and findings (e.g., the field is 
not populated in 3% of the records; the data is only 97% complete).  
At the field or column level, rules can be straightforward. Completeness rules are a reflection of whether a field is mandatory o r optional, and, if optional, the conditions under which it should be populated. Validity rules are 
dependent on stipulating the domain of valid values and, in some cases, the relationship between fields. For example, a US ZIP Code needs to be valid, in and of itself, and correctly associated with a US State code. Rules should also be defined at the data set level. For example, every customer must have a valid mailing address.  
Defining data quality rules is challenging because most people are not used to t hinking about data in terms of 
rules. It may be necessary to get at the rules indirectly, by asking stakeholders about the input and output 
requirements of a business process. It also helps to ask about pain points, what happens when data is missing or incorrect, how they identify issues, how they recognize bad data, etc. Keep in mind that it is not necessary to 
know all the rules in order to assess data. Discovery and refinement of rules is an ongoing process. One of the best ways to get at rules is to sha re results of assessments. These results often give stakeholders a new 
perspective on the data from which they can articulate rules that tell them what they need to know about the data.  
2.4 Perform an Initial Data Quality Assessment 
Once the most critical business needs and the data that supports them have been identified, the most important part of the data quality assessment  is actually looking at that data, querying it to understand data content and 
relationships, and co mparing actual data to rules and expectations. The first time this is done, analysts will 
discover many things: undocumented relationships and dependencies within the data, implied rules, redundant 
 
Para verificar as assinaturas, acesse www.tcu.gov.br/autenticidade e informe o código 79193014.

--- Página 28 ---
476 • DMBOK2  
data, contradictory data, etc., as well as data that actually does conform to rules. With the help of data stewards, 
other SMEs, and data consumers, DQ analysts will need to sort out and prioritize findings.  
The goal of an initial data quality assessment is to learn about the data in order to define an actionabl e plan for 
improvement. It is usually best to start with a small, focused effort – a basic proof of concept – to demonstrate 
how the improvement process works. Steps include:  
•Define the goals of the assessment; these will drive the work
•Identify the data to be assessed; focus should be on a small data set, even a single data element, or  a
s
pecific data quality problem
•Identify uses of the data and the consumers of the data
•Identify known risks with the data to be assessed, including the potential impact of  data issues on
organizational processes
•Inspect the data based on known and proposed rules
•Document levels of non -conformance and types of issues
•Perform additional, in -depth analysis based on initial findings in order t o
oQ
uantify findings
oPrioritize issues based on business impact
oDevelop hypotheses about root causes of data issues
•Meet with Data Stewards, SMEs, and data consumers to confirm issues and priorities
•Use findings as a foundation for planning
oRemediation of issues, ideally at their root causes
oControls and process improvements to prevent issues from recurring
oOngoing controls and reporting
2.5 Identify and Prioritize Potential Improvements 
Having proven that the improvement process can work, the next goal is to apply it strategically. D oing so 
requires identifying and prioritizing potential improvements. Identification may be accomplished by full -scale 
data profiling  of larger data sets to understand the breadth of existing issues. It may also be accompli shed by 
other means, such as interviewing stakeholders about the data issues that impact them and following up with analysis of the business impact of those issues. Ultimately, prioritization requires a combination of data analysis and discussion with stak eholders.  
The steps to perform a full data profiling and analysis are essentially the same as those in performing a small -
scale assessment: define goals, understand data uses and risks, measure against rules, document and confirm findings with SMEs, use t his information to prioritize remedia tion and improvement efforts.  However, there are 
sometimes technical obstacles to full -scale profiling. And the effort will need to be coordinated across a team of 
analysts and overall results will need to be summarized  and understood if an effective action plan is to be put in 
place. Large -scale profiling efforts, like those on a smaller scale, should still focus on the most critical data.  
Profiling data is only the first step in analysis of data quality issues. It helps identify issues, but does not identify root causes, nor does it determine the impact of issues to business processes. Determining impact requires input 
 
Para verificar as assinaturas, acesse www.tcu.gov.br/autenticidade e informe o código 79193014.

--- Página 29 ---
DATA QUALITY  • 477  
from stakeholders along the data chain. When planning large scale profiling, ensure that time is allocated to 
share results, prioritize problems, and determine which issues require in -depth analysis.  
2.6 Define Goals for Data Quality Improvement  
The knowledge obtained through the preliminary assessments forms the basis for specific Data Quality program goals. Improvement can take different forms, from simple remediation (e.g., correction of errors on records) to 
remediation of root causes. Remediation and improvement plans should account for quick hits – issues that can 
be addressed immediately at low cost – and longer -term strategic changes. The strategic focus of such plans 
should be to address root causes of issues and to put in place mechanisms to prevent issues in the first place.  
Be aware that many thin gs can get in the way of improvement efforts: system constraints, age of data, ongoing 
project work that uses the questionable data, overall complexity of the data landscape, cultural resistance to change. To prevent these constraints from stalling the pro gram, set specific, achievable goals based on 
consistent quantification of the business value of the improvements to data quality.  
For example, a goal may be to improve the completeness of customer data from 90% to 95% based on process improvements and system edits. Obviously, showing improvement will involve comparing initial measurements and improved results. But the value comes with benefits of the improvement: fewer customer complaints, less time spent correcting errors, etc. Measure these things to ex plain the value of the improvement work. No one 
cares about levels of field completeness unless there is a business impact. There must be a positive return on investment for improvements to data. When issues are found, determine ROI of fixes based on:  
•The criticality (importance ranking) of the data affected
•Amount of data affected
•The age of the data
•Number and type of business processes impacted by the issue
•Number of customers, clients, vendors, or employees impacted by the issue
•Risks associated with the issue
•Costs of remediating root causes
•Costs of potential work -arounds
In assessing issues, especially those where root causes are identified and technical changes are required, always seek out opportunities to prevent issues from recurring. Preventing issues generally costs less than correcting 
them – sometimes orders of magnitude less. (See Chapter 11. ) 
2.7 Develop and Deploy Data Quality Operations  
Many Data Quality programs get started through a set of improvement projects identified via results of the data 
quality assessment. In order to sustain data quality, a DQ program should put in place a plan that allows the team to manage data quality rules and standards, monitor data’s ongoing conformance with rules, identify and manage data quality issues, and report on quality levels. In support of these activities, DQ analysts and Data 
 
Para verificar as assinaturas, acesse www.tcu.gov.br/autenticidade e informe o código 79193014.

--- Página 30 ---
478 • DMBOK2  
Stewards will also be engaged in activities such as documenting data standards and business rules and 
establishing data quality requirements for vendors.  
2.7.1 Mana ge Data Quality Rules  
The process of profiling and analyzing data will help an organization discover (or reverse engineer) business and data quality rules. As the data quality practice matures, the capture of such rules should be built into the system deve lopment and enhancement process. Defining rules upfront will:  
•Set clear expectations for data quality characteristics
•Provide requirements for system edits and controls that prevent data issues from being introduced
•Provide data quality requirements to ven dors and other external parties
•Create the foundation for ongoing data quality measurement and reporting
In short, data quality rules and standards are a critical form of Metadata. To be effective, they need to be managed as Metadata. Rules should be:  
•Docu mented consistently : Establish standards and templates for documenting rules so that they have
a consistent format and meaning.
•Defined in terms of Data Quality dimensions : Dimensions of quality help people understand what is
being measured. Consistent ap plication of dimensions will help with the measurement and issue
management processes.
•Tied to business impact : While data quality dimensions enable understanding of common problems,
they are not a goal in -and-of-themselves. Standards and rules should be c onnected directly to their
impact on organizational success. Measurements that are not tied to business processes should not b
e
t
aken.
•Backed by data analysis : Data Quality Analysts should not guess at rules. Rules should be tested
against actual data. In  many cases, rules will show that there are issues with the data. But analysis can
also show that the rules themselves are not complete.
•Confirmed by SMEs : The goal of the rules is to describe how the data should look. Often, it takes
knowledge of organiz ational processes to confirm that rules correctly describe the data. This
knowledge comes when subject matter experts confirm or explain the results of data analysis.
•Accessible to all data consumers : All data consumers should have access to documented rul es. Suc h
acces
s allows them to better understand the data. It also helps to ensure that the rules are correct and
complete. Ensure that consumers have a means to ask questions about and provide feedback on rules.
 
Para verificar as assinaturas, acesse www.tcu.gov.br/autenticidade e informe o código 79193014.

--- Página 31 ---
DATA QUALITY  • 479  
2.7.2 Measure and Monitor Data Quality  
The operational Data Quality  Management procedures depend on the ability to measure and monitor the quality 
of data. There are two equally important reasons to implement operational data quality measure ments:  
•To inform data consumers about levels of quality
•To manage risk that change may be introduced through changes to business or technical processes
Some measurements serve both  purposes. Measurements should be developed based on findings from data 
assessment and root cause analysis. Measurements intended to inform data consumers will focus on critical data 
elements and relationships that, if they are not sound, will directly imp act business processes. Measurements 
related to managing risk should focus on relationships that have gone wrong in the past and may go wrong in the future. For example, if data is derived based on a set of ETL rules and those rules may be impacted by chan ges to business processes, measurements should be put in place to detect changes to the data.  
Knowledge of past problems should be applied to manage risk. For example, if numerous data issues are associated with complex derivations, then all derivations s hould be assessed – even those  that have not been 
associated with data issues. In most cases, it is worthwhile to put in place measurements that monitor functions similar to those that have had problems.  
Measurement results can be described at two levels:  the detail related to the execution of individual rules and 
overall results aggregated from the rules. Each rule should have a standard, target, or threshold index for comparison. This function most often reflects the percentage of correct data or percentage of exceptions depending on the formula used. For example:  
𝑉𝑉𝑉𝑉𝑉𝑉𝑉𝑉𝑉𝑉𝑉𝑉𝑉𝑉𝑉𝑉 (𝑟𝑟)=�𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇
𝑉𝑉𝑇𝑇
𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇(𝑟𝑟)−𝑇𝑇
𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇
𝐸𝐸𝑇𝑇
𝑉𝑉𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝐸𝐸𝑇𝑇
𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑉𝑉 (𝑟𝑟)�
𝑇𝑇
𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇 𝑉𝑉𝑇𝑇
𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇(𝑟𝑟)
𝑉𝑉
𝑇𝑇𝐼𝐼
𝑉𝑉𝑉𝑉𝑉𝑉𝑉𝑉𝑉𝑉𝑉𝑉𝑉𝑉 (𝑟𝑟)=�𝑇𝑇
𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇
𝐸𝐸𝑇𝑇
𝑉𝑉𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝐸𝐸𝑇𝑇
𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑉𝑉 (𝑟𝑟)�
𝑇𝑇
𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇 𝑉𝑉
𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇(𝑟𝑟)
R represents the rule being tested. For example, 10,000 tests of a business rule (r) found 560 exceptions. In this example, the ValidDQ result would be 9440/10,000 = 94.4%, and the Invalid DQ result would be 560/10,000 = 5.6% . 
Organizing the metrics and results as shown in Table 30 can help to structure measures, metrics, and indicators 
across the report, reveal possible rollups, and enhance communications. The report can be more formalized and linked to projects that will remediate the issues. Filter ed reports are useful for data stewards looking for trends 
and contributions. Table 30 provides examples of rules constructed in this manner. Where applicable, result s of 
rules are expressed in both positive percentages (the portion of the data that conforms to rules and expectations) and negative percentages (the portion of the data that does not conform to the rule).  
Data quality rules provide the foundation for ope rational management of data quality. Rules can be integrated 
into application services or data services that supplement the data lifecy cle, either through Commercial O ff The 
Shelf (COTS)  data quality tools, rules engines and reporting tools for monitoring and reporting, or custom -
developed applications.  
 
Para verificar as assinaturas, acesse www.tcu.gov.br/autenticidade e informe o código 79193014.

--- Página 32 ---
480 • DMBOK2  
Table 30 DQ Metric E xamples  
Dimension and 
Business Rule  Measure  Metrics  Status 
Indicator  
Completeness  
Business Rule 1: 
Population of field 
is mandatory  Count the number of 
records where data is 
populated, compare to 
the total number of 
records  Divide the obtained number of records 
where data is populated by the total 
number of records in the table or dat abase 
and multiply it by 100 to get to percentage 
complete  Unacceptable: 
Below 80% populated 
Above 20% 
not populated  
Example 1:  
Postal Code must be populated in the address table  Count populated: 
700,000  
Count not populated:  
300,000  
Total count: 1,000,000  Positive measure:  
700,000/1,000,000*100 = 70% populated Negative measure:  
300,000/1,000,000 *100 = 30% not 
populated  Example 
result: Unacceptable 
Uniqueness  
Business Rule 2: There should be only one record per entity instance in a 
table  Count  the number of 
duplicate  records 
identified; report on the percentage of records that represent duplicates Divide the number of duplicate records by 
the total number of records in the table or database and multiply it by 100  Unacceptable: 
Above 0%  
Example 2:  
There should be one and only one current row per postal code on the Postal Codes 
master list  Count of duplicates: 
1,000  
Total Count: 1,000,000  10,000/1,000,000*100 = 1.0% of postal 
codes are present on more than one current row Example 
result: 
Unacceptable 
Timeliness  
Business Rule 3: Records must arrive within a scheduled timeframe  Count the number of 
records failing to arrive on time from a data service for business transactions to be completed  Divide the number of incomplete 
transactions by  the total number of 
attempted transactions in a time period and multiply by 100 Unacceptable:  
Below 99% completed on time 
Above 1% not completed on 
time 
Example 3:  
Equity market record should arrive within 5 minutes of being transacted  Count of incomplete 
transactions: 2000  
Count of attempted transactions: 1,000,000  Positive:  
(1,000,000 – 2000) / 1,000,000*100 = 
99.8% of transaction records arrived within defined timeframe  
Negative:  
2000/1,000,000*100 = 0.20% of 
transactions did not arrive within defined 
timeframe  Example 
Result: 
Acceptable  
Validity  
Business Rule 4: If field X = value 1, then field Y must = 
value 1 -prime  Count the number of 
records where the rule is met  Divide the number of records that meet the 
condition by the total number of records  Unacceptable : 
Below 100% adherence to the rule  
Example 4:  
Only shipped orders should be billed  Count of records where 
status for shipping = Shipped and status for billing = Billed: 999,000  
Count of total records: 
1,000,000  Positive:  
999,000/1,000,000*100 = 99.9% of records conform to the rule  
Negative:  
(1,000,000- 999,000) / 1,000,000 *100 = 
0.10% do not conform to the rule  Example 
Result: Unacceptable 
 
Para verificar as assinaturas, acesse www.tcu.gov.br/autenticidade e informe o código 79193014.

--- Página 33 ---
DATA QUALITY  • 481  
Provide continuous monitoring by incorporating control and measurement processes into the information 
processing flow. Automated monitoring of conformance to data quality rules can be done in- stream or through a 
batch process. Measurements can be taken at three levels  of granularity: the data element value, data instance or 
record, or the data set. Table 31 describes techniques for collecting data quality measurements. In- stream 
measurements can be taken while creating data or handing data off between processing stages. Batch queries 
can be performed on collections of data instances assembled in a data set, usually in persistent storage. Data set measurements generally cannot be tak en in -stream, since the measurement may need the entire set.  
Incorporating the results of the control and measurement processes into both the operational procedures and reporting frameworks enables continuous monitoring of the levels of data quality for f eedback and improvement 
to the data generation/collection activities.  
Table 31 Data Quality Monitoring Techniques  
Granularity  In-stream (In -Process Flow) Treatment  Batch Treatment  
Data Element  Edit checks in application  
Data element validation services  
Specially programmed applications  Direct queries  
Data profiling or analyzer tool  
Data Record  Edit checks in application  
Data record validation services  
Specially programmed applications  Direct queries  
Data profiling or analyzer tool  
Data set  Inspection inserted between processing stages  Direct queries  
Data profiling or analyzer tool  
2.7.3 Develop Operational Procedures for Managing Data Issues  
Whatever tools are used to monitor data quality , when results are assessed by Data Quality team members, they 
need to respond to findings in a timely and effective manner. The team must design and implement detailed operational procedures for:  
•Diagnosing iss ues: The objective is to review the symptoms of the data quality incident, trace th
e
lin
eage of the data in question, identify the problem and where it originated, and pinpoint potential roo t
cau
ses of the problem. The procedure should describe how the Dat a Quality Operations team would:
oReview the data issues in the context of the appropriate information processing flows andisolate the location in the process where the flaw is introduced
oEvaluate whether there have been any environmental changes that would cause errors enteri
ng
in
to the system
oEvaluate whether or not there are any other process issues that contributed to the data qualityincident
oDetermine whether there are issues with external data that have affected the quality of the data
NOTE: The work of root cause analysis requires input from technical and business SMEs. While the 
DQ team may lead and facilitate this kind of work effort, success requires  cross -functional 
collaboration   
 
Para verificar as assinaturas, acesse www.tcu.gov.br/autenticidade e informe o código 79193014.

--- Página 34 ---
482 • DMBOK2  
•Formulating options for remediation : Based on the diagnosis, evaluate alternatives for addressing
the issue. These may include:
oAddressing non- technical root causes such as lack of training, lack of leadership support,
unclear accountability and ownersh ip, etc.
oModification of the systems to eliminate technical root causes
oDeveloping controls to prevent the issue
oIntroducing additional inspection and monitoring
oDirectly correcting flawed data
oTaking no action based on the cost and impact of correction versus the value of the dat a
co
rrection
•Resolving issues : Having identified options for resolving the issue, the Data Quality team must confer
with the business data owners to determine the best way to resolve the issue. These procedures should
detail how t he analysts:
oAssess the relative costs and merits of the alternatives
oRecommend one of the planned alternatives
oProvide a plan for developing and implementing the resolution
oImplement the resolution
Decisions made during the issue management process should  be tracked in an incident tracking system. When 
the data in such a system is managed well, it can provide valuable insight about the causes and costs of data issues. Include a description of the issue and the root causes, options for remediation, and the decision on how to resolve the issue.  
The incident tracking system will collect performance data relating to issue resolution, work assignments, volume of issues, frequency of occurrence, as well as the time to respond, diagnose, plan a solution, and resol ve 
issues. These metrics can provide valuable insights into the effectiveness of the current workflow, as well as systems and resource utilization, and they are important management data points that can drive continuous operational improvement for data qua lity control.  
Incident tracking data also helps data consumers. Decisions based upon remediated data should be made with knowledge that it has been changed, why it has been changed, and how it has been changed. That is one reason why it is important to rec ord the methods of modification and the rationale for them. Make this documentation 
available to data consumers and developers researching code changes. While changes may be obvious to the people who implement them, the history of changes will be lost to future data consumers unless it is documented. Data quality incident tracking requires staff be trained on how issues should be classified, logged, and tracked. To support effective tracking:  
•Standardize data quality issues and activities : Since the terms used to describe data issues may vary
across lines of business, it is valuable to define a standard vocabulary for the concepts used. Doing sowill simplify classification and reporting. Standardization also makes it easier to measure the volumeof issues and activities, identify patterns and interdependencies between systems and participants, and
 
Para verificar as assinaturas, acesse www.tcu.gov.br/autenticidade e informe o código 79193014.

--- Página 35 ---
DATA QUALITY  • 483  
report on the overall impact of data quality activities. The classification of an issue may change as the 
investigation deepens and root causes are exposed.  
•Provi de an assignment process for data issues : The operational procedures direct the analysts to
assign data quality incidents to individuals for diagnosis and to provide alternatives for resolution.Drive the assignment process within the incident tracking system by suggesting those individuals wit
h
s
pecific areas of expertise.
•Manage issue escalation procedures : Data quality issue handling requires a well -defined system o f
es
calation based on the impact, duration, or urgency of an issue. Specify the sequence of escalation
within the data quality Service Level Agreement . The incident tracking system will implement the
escalation procedures, which helps expedite efficient handling and resolution of data issues.
•Manage data quality resolution workflow : The data quality SLA specifies objectives for monitoring,
control, and resolution, all of which define a collection of operational workflows. The incident trackingsystem can support workflow management to track progress with issues diagnosis and resoluti on.
2.7.4 Establish Data Quality Service Level Agreements 
A data quality Service Level Agreement (SLA)  specifies an organization’s expectations for response and 
remediation for data quality issues in each system. Data quality inspections as scheduled in the SLA help to identify issues to fix, and over time, reduce the number of issues. While enabling the i solation and root cause 
analysis of data flaws, there is an expectation that the operational procedures will provide a scheme for remediation of root causes within an agreed timeframe. Having data quality inspection and monitoring in place 
increases the likelihood of detection and remediation of a data quality issue before a significant business impact can occur. Operational data quality control defined in a data quality SLA includes:  
•Data elements covered by the agreement
•Business impacts associated with d ata flaws
•Data quality dimensions associated with each data element
•Expectations for quality for each data element for each of the identified dimensions in each applicationor system in the data value chain
•Methods for measuring against those expectations
•Acceptability threshold for each measurement
•Steward(s) to be notified in case the acceptability threshold is not met
•Timelines and deadlines for expected resolution or remediation of the issue
•Escalation strategy, and possible rewards and penalties
The da ta quality SLA also defines the roles and responsibilities associated with performance of operational data 
quality procedures. The operational data quality procedures provide reports in conformance with the defined business rules, as well as monitoring sta ff performance in reacting to data quality incidents. Data stewards and 
the operational data quality staff, while upholding the level of data quality service, should consider their data quality SLA constraints and connect data quality to individual perform ance plans.  
 
Para verificar as assinaturas, acesse www.tcu.gov.br/autenticidade e informe o código 79193014.

--- Página 36 ---
484 • DMBOK2  
When issues are not addressed within the specified resolution times, an escalation process must exist to 
communicate non -observance of the level of service up the management and governance chain. The data quality 
SLA establishes the time limits  for notification generation, the names of those in that management chain, and 
when escalation needs to occur. Given the set of data quality rules, methods for measuring conformance, the acceptability thresholds defined by the business clients, and the ser vice level agreements, the Data Quality team 
can monitor compliance of the data to the business expectations, as well as how well the Data Quality team performs on the procedures associated with data errors.  
SLA reporting can be on a scheduled basis driven by business and operational requirements. Particular focus 
will be on report trend analysis in cases focused on periodic rewards and penalties if such concepts are built into the SLA framework.  
2.7.5 Develop Data Quality Reporting  
The work of assessing t he quality of data and managing data issues  will not benefit the organization unless the 
information is shared through reporting so that data consumers understand the condition of the data. Reporting should focus  around:  
•Data quality scorecard, which provides a high -level view of the scores associated with various metrics,
reported to different levels of the organization within established thresholds
•Data quality trends, which show over time how the quality of data is measured, and whether trending i
s
u
p or down
•SLA Metrics, such as whether operational data quality staff diagnose and respond to data qualityincidents in a timely manner
•Data quality issue management, which monitors the status of issues and resolutions
•Conformance of the Data Quality team to governance policies
•Conformance of IT and business teams to Data Quality policies
•Positive effects of improvement projects
Reporting should align to metrics in the data quality SLA as much as possible, so that th e team’s goals are 
aligned with those of its customers. The Data Quality program should also report on the positive effects of improvement projects. It is best to do this in business terms to continually remind the organization of the direct effect that da ta has on customers.  
3.T ools
Tools should be selected and tool architectures should be set in the planning phase of the enterprise Data Quality program. Tools provide a partial rule set starter kit but organizations need to create and input their own context specific rules and actions into any tool.  
 
Para verificar as assinaturas, acesse www.tcu.gov.br/autenticidade e informe o código 79193014.

--- Página 37 ---
DATA QUALITY  • 485  
3.1 Data Profiling Tools  
Data profiling tools  produce high- level statistics that enable analysts to identify patterns in data and perform 
initial assessment of quality characteristics. Some tools can be used to perform ongoing monitoring of data. 
Profiling tools are particularly important for data di scovery efforts because they enable assessment of large data 
sets. Profiling tools augmented with data visualization capabilities will aid in the process of discovery. (See Chapters 5 and 8, and Section 1.3.9 .) 
3.2 Data Querying Tools  
Data profiling is onl y the first step in data analysis . It helps identify potential issues. Data Quality team 
members also need to query data more deeply to answer questions raised by profiling results and find patterns that provide insight into roo t causes of data issues. For example, querying to discover and quantify other aspects 
of data quality, such as uniqueness and integrity.  
3.3 Modeling and ETL Tools  
The tools  used to model data and create ETL processes  have a direct impact on the quality of data. If used with 
the data in mind, these tools can enable higher quality data. If they are used without knowledge of the data, they can have detrimental effects. DQ team members should work with developm ent teams to ensure that data 
quality risks are addressed and that the organization takes full advantage of the ways in which effective modeling and data processing can enable higher quality data. ( See Chapters 5, 8, and 11.)  
3.4 Data Quality Rule Template s 
Rule templates  allow analyst to capture expectations for data. Templates also help bridge the communications 
gap between business and technical teams. Consistent formulation of rules makes it easier to translate business needs  into code, whether that code is embedded in a rules engine, the data analyzer component of a data-
profiling tool, or a data integration tool. A template can have several sections, one for each type of business rule to implement.  
3.5 Metadata Repositories  
As noted in Section 1.3.4, defining data quality requires Metadata and definitions of high quality data are a 
valuable kind of Metadata. DQ teams should work closely with teams that manage Metadata to ensure that data quality requirements, rules, measurement results, and documentation of issues are made available to data consumers.  
 
Para verificar as assinaturas, acesse www.tcu.gov.br/autenticidade e informe o código 79193014.

--- Página 38 ---
486 • DMBOK2  
4.Te chniques
4.1 Preventive Actions  
The best way to create high quality data is to prevent poor quality dat a from entering an organization. 
Preventive actions  stop known errors from occurring. Inspecting data after it is in production will not improve 
its quality. Approaches include:  
•Establish data entry controls : Create data entry rules that prevent invalid or inaccurate data from
entering a system.
•Train data producers: Ensure staff in upstream systems understand the impact of their data on
downstream users. Give incentives or base evaluations on data accuracy and completeness, rather thanjust speed.
•Define and enforce rules : Create a ‘data firewall,’ which has a table with all the business data quality
rules used to check if the quality of data is good, before being used in an application such a dat
a
w
arehous e. A data firewall can inspect the level of quality of data processed by an application, and if
the level of quality is below acceptable levels, analysts can be informed about the problem.
•Demand high quality data from data suppliers : Examine an external d ata provider’s processes to
check their structures, definitions, and data source(s) and data provenance. Doing so enablesassessment of how well their data will integrate and helps prevent the use of non- authoritative data or
data acquired without permissi on from the owner.
•Implement Data Governance and Stewardship: Ensure roles and responsibilities are defined tha
t
d
escribe and enforce rules of engagement, decision rights, and accountabilities for effective
management of data and information assets (McGilv ray, 2008). Work with data  stewards to revise the
process of, and mechanisms for, generating, sending, and receiving data.
•Institute formal change control : Ensure all changes to stored data are defined and tested before being
implemented. Prevent changes directly to data outside of normal processing by establishing gatingprocesses.
4.2 Corrective Actions  
Corrective actions are implemented after a problem has occurred and been detected. Data quality issues  should 
be addressed systemically and at their root causes to minimize the costs and risks of corrective actions. ‘Solve the problem where it happens’ is the best practice in Data Quality Management. This generally means that corrective actions should include preventing recurrence of the causes of the quality problems.   
Perform data correction in three general ways:  
 
Para verificar as assinaturas, acesse www.tcu.gov.br/autenticidade e informe o código 79193014.

--- Página 39 ---
DATA QUALITY  • 487  
•Automated correction : Automated correction techniques include rule- based standardization,
normalization, and correction. The modified values are obtained or generated and committed without
manual intervention. An example is automated address correction, which submits delivery addresses toan address standardizer that conforms and corrects delivery addresses using rules, parsing,standardization, and reference tables. Automated correction requires an environment with well -define
d
s
tandards, commonly accepted rules, and known error patterns. The amount of automated correction
can be reduced over time if this environment is well -managed and corrected data is shared with
upstream systems.
•Manually -directed correction : Use automated tools to remediate and correct data but require manual
review before committing the corrections to persistent storage. Apply name and address remediation,identity resolution, and pattern -based corrections automatically, and use some scoring mechanism to
propose a level of confidence in the correction. Corrections with scores above a particular level ofconfidence may be committed without review, but corrections with scores below the level ofconfidence are presented to the data steward for review and approval. Commit all approvedcorrections, and review those not approved to understand whether to adjust the applied underlyingrules. Environments in which se nsitive data sets require human oversight (e.g., MDM) are good
examples of where manual -directed correction may be suited.
•Manual correction : Sometimes manual correction is the only option in the absence of tools or
automation or if it is determined that the change is better handled through human oversight. Manualcorrections are best done through an interface with controls and edits, which provide an audit trail forchanges. The alternative of making corrections and committing the updated records directly i
n
pr
oduction environments is extremely risky. Avoid using this method.
4.3 Quality Check and Audit Code Modules  
Create shareable, linkable, and re- usable code modules that execute repeated data quality checks and audit 
processes that developers can get from a library. If the module needs to change, then all the code linked to that module will get updated. Such modules simplify the maintenance process. Well -engineered code blocks can 
prevent many data quality problems. As importantly, they ensure processes  are executed consistently. Where 
laws or policy mandate reporting of specific quality results, the lineage of results often needs to be described. Quality check modules can provide this. For data that has any questionable quality dimension and that is hig hly 
rated, qualify the information in the shared environments with quality notes, and confidence ratings.  
4.4 Effective Data Quality Metrics  
A critical component of managing data quality  is developing metrics that inform data consumers about quality 
characteristics that are important to their uses of data. Many things can be measured, but not all of them are worth the time and effort. In developing metrics, DQ analysts should account for these characteristics:  
 
Para verificar as assinaturas, acesse www.tcu.gov.br/autenticidade e informe o código 79193014.

--- Página 40 ---
488 • DMBOK2  
•Measurability : A data quality metric must be measurable – it needs to be something that can b e
co
unted. For example, data relevancy is not measurable, unless clear criteria are set for what makes
data relevant. Even data completeness needs to be objectively defined in order to be measured.
Expected results should be quantifiable within a discrete range.
•Business relevance: While many things are measurable, not all translate into useful metrics.
Measurements need to be relevant to data consumers. The value of the metric is limited if it cannot b e
r
elated to some aspect of business operations or performance. Every data quality metric should
correlate with the influence of the data on key business expectations.
•Acceptability : The data quality dimensions frame the business requirements for data quality.
Quantifying along the identified dimension provides hard evidence of data quality levels. Determin e
w
hether data meets business expectations based on specified acceptability thresholds. If the score is
equal to or exceeds the threshold, the quality of the data meets business expectations. If the score isbelow the threshold, it does not.
•Accountability / Stewardship: Metrics should be understood and approved by key stakeholders (e.g.,
business owners and Data Stewards). They are notified when the measurement for the metric shows
that the quality does not meet expectations. The business data owner is accountable, while a dat
a
s
teward takes appropriate corrective action.
•Controllability : A metric should reflect a controllable aspect of the business. In other words, if the
metric is out of range, it should trigger action to improve the data. If there is no way to respond, thenthe metric is probably not useful.
•Trending : Metrics enable an organization to measure data quality improvement over time. Tracking
helps Data Quality team members monitor activities within the scope of a data quality SLA and dat
a
s
haring agreement, and demonstrate the effectiveness of improvement activities. Once an information
process is stable, statistical process control techniques can be applied to detect changes to th e
p
redictability of the measurement results and the business and technical processes on which it provides
insight.
4.5 Statistical Process Control 
Statistical Process Control (SPC) is a method to manage processes by analyzing measurements of variation in 
process inputs, outputs, or steps. The technique was developed in the manufacturing sector in the 1920s and has been applied in other industries, in improvement methodologies such as Six Sigma, and in Data Quality Management.
87 Simply defined, a process is a series of steps executed to turn inputs into outputs. SPC is based 
on the assumption that when a process with consistent inputs is executed consistently, it will produce consistent outputs. It uses measures of central tendency (how values cluster around a central value, such as a mean, 
87 See Redman (1996 and 2001), Loshin (2000), Sebastian-Coleman (2013),  Jugulum (2014). 
 
Para verificar as assinaturas, acesse www.tcu.gov.br/autenticidade e informe o código 79193014.

--- Página 41 ---
DATA QUALITY  • 489  
median, or mode) and of variability around a central value (e.g., range, variance, standard deviation), to 
establish tolerances for variation within a process.  
The primary tool used for SPC is the control chart ( Figure 95), which i s a time series graph that includes a 
central line for the average (the measure of central tendency) and depicts calculated upper and lower control 
limits (variability around a central value). In a stable process, measurement results outside the control li mits 
indicate a special cause.  
Figure 95 Control Chart of a P rocess in Statistical Control  
SPC measures the predictability of process outcomes by identifying variation within a process. Processes have variation of two types: Common Causes that are inherent in the process and Special Causes that are unpredictable or intermittent. When the only so urces of variation are common causes, a system is said to be in 
(statistical) control and a range of normal variation can be established. This is the baseline against which change can be detected.  
Applying SPC to data quality measurement is based on the w orking assumption that, like a manufactured 
product, data is the product of a process. Sometimes the process that creates data is very simple (e.g., a person fills out a form). Other times, processes are quite complex: a set of algorithms aggregates medical claim data in order to follow trends related to the effectiveness of particular clinical protocols. If such a process has consistent inputs and is executed consistently, it will produce consistent results each time it is run. However, if the inputs or ex ecution change, then so will the outputs. Each of these components can be measured. The measurements 
can be used to detect special causes. Knowledge of the special causes can be used to mitigate risks associated with data collection or processing.  
SPC is used for control, detection, and improvement. The first step is to measure the process in order to identify and eliminate special causes. This activity establishes the control state of the process. Next is to put in place 
0,170,180,190,200,21Percentage of defaults per loadExample of Data from a Stable (in -control) Process
UCL= 0,21061
͞x=0.1885
LCL=0,16639
TGT_TBL_ETL_DT0,16
 
Para verificar as assinaturas, acesse www.tcu.gov.br/autenticidade e informe o código 79193014.

--- Página 42 ---
490 • DMBOK2  
measurements to detect unexpected variation as soon as it is detectable. Early detection of problems simplifies 
investigation of their root causes. Measurements of the process can also be used to reduce the unwanted effects of common causes of variation, allowing for increased efficiency.  
4.6 Root Cause Analysis  
A root cause of a problem is a factor that, if eliminated, would remove the problem itself. Root cause analysis is 
a process of understanding factors that contribute to problems and the ways they contribute. Its purpose is to identify underlying conditions that, if eliminated, would mean problems would disappear.  
A data management example may clarify the definition. Let’s say a data process that runs each month requires 
as input a file of customer information. Measurement of the data shows that in April, July, October, and January, the quality of the data goes down. Inspection of the timing of delivery shows that in March, June, September, and December, the file is delivered on the 30
th of the month, where as at other times it is delivered on 
the 25th. Further analysis shows that the team responsible for delivering the file is also responsible for closing 
quarterly financial processes. These processes take precedence over other work and the files are deliver ed late 
during those months, impacting the quality. The root cause of the data quality problem turns out to be a process delay caused by a competing priority. It can be addressed by scheduling file delivery and ensuring that resources can deliver within the schedule.  
Common techniques for root cause analysis include Pareto analysis (the 80/20 rule), fishbone diagram analysis, track and trace, process analysis, and the Five Whys (McGilvray, 2008).  
5.Implementation Guidelines
Improving the quality of data  within an organization is not an easy task – even when data quality improvement 
efforts are launched from within a data governance program and with the support of senior manag ement. A 
classic academic discussion is whether it is better to implement a Data Quality program top -down or bottom -up. 
Typically, a hybrid approach works best – top-down for sponsorship, consistency, and resources, but bottom -up 
to discover what is actually broken and to achieve incremental successes.  
Improving data quality requires changes in how people think about and behave toward data. Cultural change is challenging. It requires planning, training, and reinforcement. (See Chapter  17.) While the specifi cs of cultural 
change will differ from organization to organization, most Data Quality program implementations need to plan for: 
•Metrics on the value of data and the cost of poor quality data: One way to raise organizationalawareness of the need for Data Quality Management is through metrics that describe the value of dat
a
a
nd the return on investment from improvements. These metrics (which differ from data qualit y
s
cores) provide the basis for funding improvements and changing the behavior of both staff a nd
management. (See Chapter 11. )
 
Para verificar as assinaturas, acesse www.tcu.gov.br/autenticidade e informe o código 79193014.

--- Página 43 ---
DATA QUALITY  • 491  
•Operating model for IT/Business interactions : Business people know what the important data is, and
what it means. Data Custodians from IT understand where and how the data is stored, and so they ar e
w
ell placed to translate definitions of data quality into queries or code that identify specific records tha t
do n
ot comply. (See Chapter 11.)
•Changes in how projects are executed : Project oversight must ensure project funding includes steps
related to data quality (e.g., profiling and assessment, definition of quality expectations, data issue
remediation, prevention and correction, building controls and measurements). It is prudent to makesure issues are identified early and to build data quality expectations upfront in p rojects.
•Changes to business processes : Improving data quality depends on improving the processes by which
data is produced. The Data Quality team needs to be able to assess and recommend changes to non-technical (as well as technical) processes that impac t the quality of data.
•Funding for remediation and improvement projects : Some organizations do not plan for
remediating data, even when they are aware of data quality issues. Data will not fix itself. The costsand benefits of remediation and improvement projects should be documented so that work onimproving data can be prioritized.
•Funding for Data Quality Operations : Sustaining data quality requires ongoing operations t
o
m
onitor data quality, report on findings, and continue to manage issues as they ar e discovered.
5.1 Readiness Assessment / Risk Assessment 
Most organizations that depend on data have a lot of opportunity for improvement. How formal and well -
supported a Data Quality  program will be de pends on how mature the organization is from a data management 
perspective. (See Chapter  15.) Organizational readiness to adopt data quality practices can be assessed by 
considering the following characteristics:  
•Management commitment to managing data as a strategic asset : As part of asking for support for a
Data Quality program, it is import to determine how well senior management understands the role tha t
d
ata plays in the organization. To what degree does senior management recognize the value of data to
strategic goals? What risks do they associate with poor quality data? How knowledgeable are theyabout the benefits of data governance? How optimistic about the ability to change culture to supportquality improvement?
•The organization’s current understa nding of the quality of its data : Before most organizations
start their quality improvement journey, they generally understand the obstacles and pain points thatsignify poor quality data. Gaining knowledge of these is important. Through them, poor quality  dat
a
can
 be directly associated with negative effects, including direct and indirect costs, on the organization.
An understanding of pain points also helps identify and prioritize improvement projects.
•The actual state of the data : Finding an objective w ay to describe the condition of data that is causing
pain points is the first step to improving the data. Data can be measured and described through
 
Para verificar as assinaturas, acesse www.tcu.gov.br/autenticidade e informe o código 79193014.

--- Página 44 ---
492 • DMBOK2  
profiling and analysis, as well as through quantification of known issues and pain points. If the DQ 
team d oes not know the actual state of the data, then it will be difficult to prioritize and act on 
opportunities for improvement.  
•Risks associated with data creation, processing, or use : Identifying what can go wrong with data
and the potential damage to an organization from poor quality data provides the basis for mitigatingrisks. If the organization does not recognize these risks, it may be challenging to get support for theData Qual ity program.
•Cultural and technical readiness for scalable data quality monitoring : The quality of data can b
e
n
egatively impacted by business and technical processes. Improving the quality of data depends on
cooperation between business and IT teams. If the relationship between business and IT teams is notcollaborative, then it will be difficult to make progress.
Findings from a readiness assessment will help determine where to start and how quickly to proceed. Findings can also provide the basis for ro ad-mapping program goals. If there is strong support for data quality 
improvement and the organization knows its own data, then it may be possible to launch a full strategic program. If the organization does not know the actual state of its data, then it may be necessary to focus on building that knowledge before developing a full strategy.  
5.2 Organization and Cultural Change  
The quality of data  will not be improved through a collection o f tools and concepts, but through a mindset that 
helps employees and stakeholders to act while always thinking of the quality of data and what the business and their customers need. Getting an organization to be conscientious about data quality often requi res significant 
cultural change. Such change requires vision and leadership. (See Chapter 17. ) 
The first step is promoting awareness about the role and importance of data to the organization. All employees must act responsibly and raise data quality issues , ask for good quality data as consumers, and provide quality 
information to others. Every person who touches the data can impact the quality of that data. Data quality is not just the responsibility of a DQ team or IT group.  
Just as the employees need to understand the cost to acquire a new customer or retain an existing customer, they 
also need to know the organizational costs of poor quality data, as well as the conditions that cause data to be of poor quality. For example, if customer data is incomplete, a customer may receive the wrong product, creating direct and indirect costs to an organization. Not only will the customer return the product, but he or she may call and complain, using call center time, with the potential for reputational damage to the  organization. If customer 
data is incomplete because the organization has not established clear requirements, then everyone who uses this data has a stake in clarifying requirements and following standards.  
Ultimately, employees need to think and act dif ferently if they are to produce better quality data and manage 
data in ways that ensures quality. This requires training and reinforcement. Training should focus on:  
•Common causes of data problems
 
Para verificar as assinaturas, acesse www.tcu.gov.br/autenticidade e informe o código 79193014.

--- Página 45 ---
DATA QUALITY  • 493  
•Relationships within the organization’s data ecosystem and why improving data quality requires an
enterprise approach
•Consequences of poor quality data
•Necessity for ongoing improvement (why improvement is not a one -time thing)
•Becoming ‘data -lingual ’, about to articulate the impact of data on organizational strat egy and success,
regulatory reporting, customer satisfaction
Training should also include an introduction to any process changes, with assertions about how the changes 
improve data quality.  
6.D ata Quality and Data Governance
A Data Quality program  is more effective when part of a data governance program. Often data quality issues are 
the reason for establishing enterprise -wide data governance (see Chapter 3). Incorporating data quality efforts 
into the overall gover nance effort enables the Data Quality program team to work with a range of stakeholders 
and enablers:  
•Risk and security personnel who can help identify data -related organizational vulnerabilities
•Business process engineering and training staff who can help teams implement process improvements
•Business and operational data stewards, and data owners who can identify critical data, defin e
s
tandards and quality expectations, and prioritize remediation  of data issues
A Governance Organization can accelerate the work of a Data Quality program by: 
•Setting priorities
•Identifying and coordinating access to those who should be involved in various data quality -related
decisions and activities
•Developing and maintaining standards for data quality
•Reporting relevant measurements of enterprise -wide data quality
•Providing guidance that facilitates staff involvement
•Establishing communications mechanisms for knowledge -sharing
•Developing and applying data quality a nd compliance policies
•Monitoring and reporting on performance
•Sharing data quality inspection results to build awareness, identify opportunities for improvements,and build consensus for improvements
•Resolving variations and conflicts; providing direction
6.1 Data Quality Policy  
Data Quality  efforts should be supported by and should support data governance policies. For example, 
governance policies can authorize periodic quality audits and mandate compliance to standards and best 
 
Para verificar as assinaturas, acesse www.tcu.gov.br/autenticidade e informe o código 79193014.

--- Página 46 ---
494 • DMBOK2  
practices. All Data Management Knowledge Areas require some level of policy, but data quality policies are 
particularly important as they often touch on regulatory requirements. Each policy should include:  
•Purpose, scope and applicability of the policy
•Definitions of terms
•Responsibilities of the Data Quality program
•Responsibilities of other stakeholders
•Reporting
•Implementation of the policy, including links to risk, preventative measures, compliance, dataprotection , and data security
6.2 Metrics  
Much of the work of a Data Quality  team will focus on measuring and reporting on quality. High- level 
categories of data quality metrics include:  
•Return on Investment : Statements on cost of improvement efforts vs. the benefits of improved dat a
q
uality
•Levels of quality : Measurements of the number and percentage of errors or requirement violations
within a data set or across data sets
•Data Quality trends : Quality improvement over time (i.e., a trend) against thresholds a nd targets, o r
q
uality incidents per period
•Data issue management metrics :
oCounts of issues by dimensions of data quality
oIssues per business function and their statuses (resolved, outstanding, escalated)
oIssue by priority and severity
oTime to resolve issues
•Conformance to service levels : Organizational units involved and responsible staff, projec t
i
nterventions for data quality assessments, overall process conformance
•Data Quality plan rollout : As-is and roadmap for expansion
7.Wo rks Cited / Recommended
Batini, Carlo, and Monica Scannapieco. Data Quality: Concepts, Methodologies and Techniques . Springer, 2006. Print.  
Brackett, Michael H. Data Resource Quality: Turning Bad Habits into Good Practices . Addison-Wesley, 2000. Print.  
Deming, W. Edwards. Out of the Crisis . The MIT Press, 2000. Print.  
 
Para verificar as assinaturas, acesse www.tcu.gov.br/autenticidade e informe o código 79193014.

--- Página 47 ---
DATA QUALITY  • 495  
English, Larry. Improving Data Warehouse and Business Information Quality: Methods For Reducing Costs And Increasing 
Profits . John Wiley and  Sons, 1999. Print.  
English, Larry. Information Quality Applied: Best Practices for Improving Business Information, Processes, and Systems . 
Wiley Publishing, 2009. Print.  
Evans, Nina and Price, James. “Barriers to the Effective Deployment of Information Assets: An Executive Management Perspective.” Inter disciplinary Journal of Information, Knowledge, and Management  Volume 7, 2012. Accessed from 
http://bit.ly/2sVwvG4 . 
Fisher, Craig, Eitel Lauría, Shobha Chengalur -Smith and Richard Wang. Introduction to Information Quality . M.I.T. 
Information Quality Program Publications, 2006. Print. Advances in Information Quality Book Ser.  
Gottesdiener, Ellen. Requirements by Collaboration: Workshops for Defining Needs . Addison-Wesley Professional, 2002. 
Print.  
Hass,  Kathleen B. and Rosemary Hossenlopp. Unearthing Business Requirements: Elicitation Tools and Techniques . 
Management Concepts, Inc, 2007. Print. Business Analysis Essential Library.  
Huang, Kuan-Tsae, Yang W. Lee and Richard Y. Wang. Quality Information and Knowledge . Prentice Hall, 1999. Print.  
Jugulum, Rajesh.  Competing with High Quality Data. Wiley, 2014. Print.  
Lee, Yang W., Leo L. Pipino, James D. Funk and Richard Y. Wang. Journey to Data Quality . The MIT Press, 2006. Print.  
Loshin, David. Enterprise Knowledge Management: The Data Quality Approach. Morgan Ka ufmann, 2001. Print.  
Loshin, David. Master Data Management . Morgan Kaufmann, 2009. Print.  
Maydanchik, Arkady. Data Quality Assessment . Technics Publications, LLC, 2007 Print.  
McCallum, Ethan. Bad Data Handbook: Cleaning Up the Data So You Can Get Back to W ork. 1st Edition. O'Reilly, 2012.  
McGilvray, Danette. Executing Data Quality Projects: Ten Steps to Quality Data and Trusted Information. Morgan Kaufmann, 2008. Print.  
Myers, Dan. “The Value of Using the Dimensions of Data Quality”, Information Management , August 2013. 
http://bit.ly/2tsMYiA . 
Olson, Jack E. Data Quality: The Accuracy Dimension. Morgan Kaufmann, 2003. Print.  
Redman, Thomas. Data Quality: The Field Guide . Digital Press, 2001. Print.  
Robertson, Suzanne and James Robertson. Mastering the Requirements Process: Getting Requirements Right . 3rd ed. 
Addison-Wesley Professional, 2012. Print.  
Sebastian -Coleman, Laura. Measuring Data Quality for Ongoing Improvement: A Data Quality Assessment Framework . 
Morgan Kaufmann, 2013. Print. The Morgan Kauf mann Series on Business Intelligence.  
Tavares, Rossano. Qualidade de Dados em Gerenciamento de Clientes (CRM) e Tecnologia da Informação [Data Quality in Management of Customers and Information Technology]. São Paulo: Catálise. 2006. Print.  
Witt, Graham. Writing Effective Business Rules: A Practical Method . Morgan Kaufmann, 2012. Print.  
 
Para verificar as assinaturas, acesse www.tcu.gov.br/autenticidade e informe o código 79193014.

--- Página 48 ---
 
Para verificar as assinaturas, acesse www.tcu.gov.br/autenticidade e informe o código 79193014.

--- Página 49 ---
CHAPTER 1 4  
Big Data and Data Science  
1.Introduction
ince the early 2000s, the terms Big Data  and Data Science have, unfortunately, been bandied about as 
buzzwords. The concepts and their implications are misunderstood – or, at least, there is limited 
consensus on their meaning. Even the meaning of ‘Big’ is relative.  That said, both Big Data and Data 
Science are connected to significant technological changes that have allowed people to generate, store, and 
analyze larger and larger amounts of data. More importantly, people can use that data to predict and influence behavior, as well as to gain insight on a range of important subjects, such as health care practices, natural 
resource management, and economic development.  
Big Data refers not only to the volume of data, but also to its variety (structured and unstructured , documents, 
files, audio, video, and streaming data, etc.), and the speed at which it is produced (velocity). People who mine and develop predictive, machine learning, and prescriptive models and analytics from these and deploy results for analysis by int erested parties are called Data Scientists.  
Data Science has existed for a long time; it used to be called ‘applied statistics’. But the capability to explore data patterns has quickly evolved in the twenty- first century with the advent of Big Data and the technologies 
that support it. Traditional Business Intelligence provides ‘rear -view mirror’ reporting – analysis of structured 
data to describe past trends. In some cases, BI patterns are used to predict future behavior, but not with high confidence. Unt il recently, in -depth analysis of enormous data sets has been limited by technology. Analyses 
have relied on sampling or other means of abstraction to approximate patterns. As the capacity to collect and analyze large data sets has grown, Data Scientists h ave integrated methods from mathematics, statistics, 
computer science, signal processing, probability modeling, pattern recognition, machine learning, uncertainty modeling, and data visualization in order to gain insight and predict behaviors based on Big Data sets. In short, Data Science has found new ways to analyze and get value from data.  
As Big Data has been brought into data warehousing and Business Intelligence environments, Data Science 
techniques are used to provide a forward -looking (‘windshield’ ) view of the organization. Predictive 
capabilities, real -time and model -based, using different types of data sources, offer organizations better insight 
into where they are heading. (See Figure 96.) S 
497 
 
Para verificar as assinaturas, acesse www.tcu.gov.br/autenticidade e informe o código 79193014.

--- Página 50 ---
498 • DMBOK2  
Figure 96 Abate Information T riangle  
To take advantage of Big Data, however, requires change in the way that data is managed. Most data 
warehouses are based on relational models. Big Data is not generally organized in a relational model. Most data warehousing depends on the concept of  ETL (Extract, Transform, and Load). Big Data solutions, like data 
lakes, depend on the concept of E LT – loading and then transforming. As importantly, the speed and volume of 
data present challenges that require different approaches to critical aspects of  data management, such as 
integration, Metadata Management, and Data Quality assessment.  
1.1 Business Drivers  
The biggest business driver for developing organizational capabilities around Big Data and Data Science is the desire to find and act on business  opportunities that may be discovered through data sets generated through a 
diversified range of processes. Big Data can stimulate innovation by making more and larger data sets available for exploration. This data can be used to define predictive models that anticipate customer needs and enable personalized presentation of products and services. Data Science can improve operations. Machine learning algorithms can automate complex time -consuming activities, thus improving organizational efficiency, reducing 
costs, and mitigating risks.  
DATA
INFORMATION
KNOWLEDGE
INSIGHTRaw data
Data with basic context
(associative meta- data)
Data with businessContext or function
Understanding the question –Business c ontext, function and 
related Information
SMART DATA
Trusted Source For Business Decisions
Data Science: Finding 
patterns/clusters in information; 
providing insight where one would 
not know to look forBIG DATAMaster DataAbate 
Information 
Triangle
Business Intelligence
Drill- Down Warehousing
Data Visualizations
Exception ReportingPast
Present
FutureData Science
Predictive Analytics
Prescriptive Analytics
Machine Learning
 
Para verificar as assinaturas, acesse www.tcu.gov.br/autenticidade e informe o código 79193014.

--- Página 51 ---
BIG DATA AND DATA SCIENCE  • 499  
Figure 97 Context Diagram: Big Data and Data Science  Definition : The collection (Big Data) and analysis (Data Science, Analytics and Visualization) of 
many different types of data to find answers and insights for questions that are not known at 
the start of analysis. 
Goals : 
1. Discover relationships between data and the business.
2. Support the iterative integration of data source(s) into the enterprise.
3. Discover and analyze new factors that might affect the business.
4. Publish data using visualization techniques in an appropriate, trusted, and ethical manner.
Activities :
1. Define Big Data Strategy & Business
Needs (P)
2.Choose Data Sources (P)
3. Acquire & Ingest Data Sources (D)
4. Develop Hypotheses & Methods (D)
5. Integrate/Align Data For Analysis (D)
6. Explore Data Using Models (D)
7. Deploy and Monitor (O)Inputs :
•Business Strategy
& Goals 
•Build/Buy/RentDecision Tree
•IT Standards
•Data SourcesDeliverables :
•Big Data Strategy &
Standards
•Data Sourcing Plan
•Acquired DataSources
•Initial data analysis andhypotheses
•Data insights andfindings
•Enhancement Plan
Suppliers : 
• Big Data Platform
Architects
• Data Scientists
• Data Producers
• Data Suppliers
• Information ConsumersConsumers : 
• Business Partners
• Business Executives
• IT ExecutivesParticipants : 
• Big Data Platform Architects
• Ingestion Architects
• Data SME’s
• Data Scientists
• Analytic Design Lead
• DM Managers
• Metadata Specialists
T echniques : 
• Data Mashups
• Machine LearningT echniques
• Advanced Supervise
d
Le
arningT ools : 
• Distributed File- based Solutions
• Columnar Compression
• MPP Shared- Nothing Architectures
• In-memory Computing a nd
D
atabases
• In-database Algorithms
• Data Visualization toolsetsMetrics : 
• Data usage metrics
• Response and performancemetrics
• Data loading and scanningmetrics
• Learnings and Stories
(P) Planning, (C) Control, (D) Development, (O) OperationsBig Data and Data Science 
Business 
Drivers
Technical
Drivers
 
Para verificar as assinaturas, acesse www.tcu.gov.br/autenticidade e informe o código 79193014.

--- Página 52 ---
500 • DMBOK2  
1.2 Principles 
The promise of Big Data  – that it will provide a different kind of insight – depends on being able to manage Big 
Data. In many ways, because of the wide variation in sources and formats, Big Data management will require 
more discipline than relational data management. Principles  related to Big Data management have yet to fully 
form, but one is very clear: Organizations should carefully manage Metadata related to Big Data sources in order to have an accurate inventory of data files, their origins, and their value.  
1.3 Essential Co ncepts  
1.3.1 Data Science  
As noted in the chapter introduction, Data Science  merges data mining, statistical analysis, and machine 
learning with data integration and data modeling capabilities, to build predictive models that explore data content patterns. Developing predictive models is sometimes called Data Science  because the data analyst, or 
data scientist, uses the scientific method to develop and assess a model.  
The data scientist develops a hypothesis about behavior that can be observed in the data prior to a particular action. For example, the purchase of one type of item is usually followed by the purchase of another type of item (the purchase of a house is usually followed by the purchase of furniture). Then, the  data scientist analyzes 
large amounts of historical data to determine how frequently the hypothesis has been true in the past and to statistically verify the probable accuracy of the model. If a hypothesis is valid with sufficient frequency, and if the be havior it predicts is useful, then the model may become the basis for an operational intelligence process to 
predict future behavior, even possibly in real time such as suggestive selling advertisements.  
Developing Data Science solutions involves the iterative inclusion of data sources into models that develop insights. Data Science depends on:  
•Rich data sources : Data with the potential to show otherwise invisible patterns in organizational or
customer behavior
•Information alignment and analysis : Technique s to understand data content and combine data sets to
hypothesize and test meaningful patterns
•Information delivery: Running models and mathematical algorithms against the data and produci
ng
vi
sualizations and other output to gain insight into behavior
•Presentation of findings and data insights: Analysis and presentation of findings so that insights ca n
b
e shared
Table 32 compares the role of traditional DW/BI to predictive and prescriptive analytics that can be achieved 
through Data Science techniques.  
 
Para verificar as assinaturas, acesse www.tcu.gov.br/autenticidade e informe o código 79193014.

--- Página 53 ---
BIG DATA AND DATA SCIENCE  • 501  
Table 32 Analytics Progression  
DW / Traditional BI  Data Science  
Descriptive  Predictive  Prescriptive  
Hindsight  Insight  Foresight  
Based on history:  
What happened?  
Why did it happen?  Based on predictive models: 
What is likely to happen?  Based on scenarios:  
What should we do to make things happen?  
1.3.2 The Data Science Process  
Figure 98 illustrates the iterative phases of the Data Science process. The outputs of each step become the 
inputs into the next. ( See Section 2.)  
Figure 98 Data Science Process  
The Data Science process follows the scientific method of refining knowledge by making observations, 
formulating and testing hypotheses, observing results, and formulating general theories that explain results. Within Data Science, this process takes the form of observing data and creating and evaluating models of behavior:  
•Define Big Data strategy and  business needs : Define the requirements that identify desired outcomes
with measurable tangible benefits.
•Choose data sources : Identify gaps in the cur rent data asset base and find data sources to fill thos
e
ga
ps.1. Define Big
Data Strategy 
& Business 
Need(s)
2. Choose
Data
So
urce(s)
3. Acquire &
Ingest Data 
Source(s)
4. Develo p
D
ata Science 
Hypotheses & 
Methods5. Integrate /
Align Data 
For Analysis6.Expl
ore
Data Using 
Models7. Deploy
& 
Monitor
 
Para verificar as assinaturas, acesse www.tcu.gov.br/autenticidade e informe o código 79193014.

--- Página 54 ---
502 • DMBOK2  
•Acquire and ingest data sources : Obtain data sets and onboard them.
•Develop Data Science hypotheses and methods : Explore data sources via profiling, visualization,
mining, etc.; refine requirem ents. Define model algorithm inputs, types, or model hypotheses an d
m
ethods of analysis (i.e., groupings of data found by clustering, etc.).
•Integrate and align data for analysis : Model feasibility depends in part on the quality of the source
data. Leverage trusted and credible sources. Apply appropriate data integration and cleansing
techniques to increase quality and usefulness of provisioned data sets.
•Explore data using models : Apply statistical analysis and machine learning algorithms against the
integrated data. Validate, train, and over time, evolve the model. Training entails repeated runs of th e
m
odel against actual data to verify assumptions and make adjustments, such as identifying outliers.
Through this process, requirements will be refined. Initial feasibility metrics guide evolution of themodel. New hypotheses may be introduced that require additional data sets and results of thisexploration will shape the future modeling and outputs (even changing the requirements).
•Deploy and monitor : Those models that produce useful information can be deployed to production for
ongoing monitoring of value and effectiveness. Often Data Science projects turn into data warehousin
g
p
rojects where more vigorous development processes are put in place (ETL, DQ, Master Data, etc.).
1.3.3 Big Data  
Early efforts to define the meaning of Big Data  characterized it in terms of the Three V’s: Volume, Velocity, 
Variety (Laney, 2001). As more organizations start to leverage the potential of Big Data, the list of V’s has expanded:  
•Volume : Refers to the amount of data. Big Data often has thousands of  entities or elements in billions
of records .
•Velocity : Refers to the speed at which data is captured, generated, or shared.  Big Data is often
generated and can also be distributed and even analyzed in real -time.
•Variety / Variability : Refers to  the forms i n which data is captured or delivered. Big Data requires
storage of multiple formats; data structure is often inconsistent within or across data sets.
•Viscosity : Refers to how difficult the data is to use or integrate .
•Volatility : Refers to how often data  changes occur and  therefore how long the data is useful .
•Veracity : Refers to how trustworthy the data is .
Big Data volumes are exceptionally large (greater than 100 Terabyte and often in the Petabyte and Exabyte range). In warehousing and analytic solutio ns, very large volumes of data pose challenges to data loading, 
modeling, cleansing, and analytics. These challenges are often solved using massively parallel processing, or 
 
Para verificar as assinaturas, acesse www.tcu.gov.br/autenticidade e informe o código 79193014.

--- Página 55 ---
BIG DATA AND DATA SCIENCE  • 503  
parallel processing and distributed data solutions. However, they have much wider implications. The size of 
data sets requires  changes in the overall way that data is stored and accessed, as well as in how data is 
understood (e.g., much of our current way of thinking about data is based on relational database structures), as well as how  data is managed (Adams, 2009). Figure 99 presents a visual summary of the range of data that has 
become available through Big Data technologies and th e implications on data storage options.  
Figure 99 Data Storage Challenges88 
1.3.4 Big Data Architecture Components  
The selection, installation, and configuration of a Big Data and Data Science environment require specialized expertise. End -to-end architectures must be developed and rationalized against existing data exploratory tools 
and new acquisitions.  
Figure 100 describes the DW/BI and Big Data Architecture. (Details about DW/BI components are described in 
Chapter 11.) The biggest difference between DW/BI and Big Data processi ng is that in a traditional data 
warehouse, data is integrated as it is brought into the warehouse (extract, TRANSFORM, load); while in a Big Data environment, data is ingested and loaded before it is integrated (extract, LOAD, transform). In some cases, data may not be integrated at all, in the traditional sense. Instead of being integrated in preparation for use, it is 
often integrated through particular uses (e.g., the process of building predictive models drives the integration of particular data sets).   
88 Sourced and used with permission from Robert Abate / EMC Corporation.  
Exabyte
T erabyte
GigabytePetabyte
Velocity Variety Veracity
EDW/BW Web 2.0 Internet of ThingsMobile
EDW/BW
Customers 
ProductsWeb 2.0
eCommerce
Web Logs
CollaborationSocial SitesInternet of Things
Sensors/Scanners
Log Files
Blogs/Wikis 
GPS
T exts/Images
StorageAudio/Video
Marketing
AdvertisingVolume
 
Para verificar as assinaturas, acesse www.tcu.gov.br/autenticidade e informe o código 79193014.

--- Página 56 ---
504 • DMBOK2  
Figure 100  Conceptual DW/BI and Big Data Architecture  
The difference between ETL and ELT has significant implications for how data is managed. For example, the 
integration process does not necessarily rely on or produce an enterprise data model. The risk is that much knowledge about data can be lost if processes for ingestion and use are executed in an ad hoc way. There is a need to collect and manage Metadata related to these processes, if they are to be understood and leveraged overtime.  
The following sections will describe Big Data Sources and the Data Lake construct. The activities (Ingest, Integrate, Explore, Evaluate Model) are explored under the Activities section.  
1.3.5 Sources of Big Data  
Because so much of human activi ty is executed electronically, massive amounts of data are accumulating every 
day as we move through the world, interact with each other, and transact business. Big Data  is produced 
through email, social media, online orders, an d even online video games. Data is generated not only by phones 
and point -of-sale devices, but also by surveillance systems, sensors in transportation systems, medical 
monitoring systems, industrial and utility monitoring systems, satellites, and military equipment. For example, one airline flight can generate a terabyte of data. Devices that interact directly with the Internet generate a large portion of Big Data. The connections between devices and the Internet are sometimes called the Internet of Things (IoT).  © DATALEADERS.ORG
Report   Interact
 Compare Evaluate Predict Learn
Data Visualization
DaaS
Big Data 
Results
MDMReference & 
Master Data 
Conformed
DimensionsData Warehouse
Data Mastering
Data Quality Intervention
Enrichment & AugmentationSources BI
Conceptual DW/BI and Big Data Architecture
Application
Operational
Reporting
Big Data
Data & T ext Mining
Unstructured 
Analytics
Predictive Analytics
Machine Learning
Opertional Reporting 
& Analyics
Geospatial and 
Demographic Analytics
Performance 
Management
CubesODS
Data Mart
Dependent
Data Stores
Evaluate
Model
Explore
 Integrate
 IngestData LakeEmail
Multimedia
Sensors
IoT
Sociel Network
Web DaaS
DW
Operational
Systems
Central Warehouse
Subject- Oriented
Non-Volatile   
Time-Variant
Atomic
Historical Data
Staging Area
Clean
Integrate
Enrich
Standardize
 
Para verificar as assinaturas, acesse www.tcu.gov.br/autenticidade e informe o código 79193014.

--- Página 57 ---
BIG DATA AND DATA SCIENCE  • 505  
1.3.6 Data Lake  
A data lake  is an environment where a vast amount of data of various types and structures can be ingested, 
stored, assessed, and analyzed. Data lakes can serve many purposes. For example, providing  
•An environment for Data Scientists to mine and analyze data
•A central storage area for raw data, with minimal, if any, transformation
•Alternate storage for detailed historical data warehouse data
•An online archive for records
•An environment to ingest streaming data with automated pattern identification
A data lake can be implemented as a complex configuration of data handling tools including Hadoop or other 
data storage systems, cluster services, data transformation, and data integration. These handlers have facilitated cross- infrastructure, analytic facilitation software to bring the configuration together.  
The risk of a data lake is that it can quickly become a data swamp – messy, unclean, and inconsistent. In order 
to establish an inventory of what is in a data lake, it is critical to manage Metadata as the data is ingested. In order to understand how the data in a data lake is associated or connected, data architects or data engineers often use unique keys or other techniques (semantic models, data models, etc.) so that data scientists and other 
visualization developers know how to use the information stored within the data lake. ( See Chapter 9 .)  
1.3.7 Services -Based Architecture 
Services -based architecture (SBA)  is emerging as a way to provide immediate (if not completely accurate or 
complete) data, as well as update a complete, accurate historical data set, using the same source (Abate, Aiken, Burke, 1997). The SBA architecture is similar to  the DW architectures which send data directly to an ODS for 
immediate access, as well as to the DW for historical accumulation. SBA architectures have three main components, a batch layer, a speed layer, and a serving layer. (See Figure 101.) 
•Batch layer : A data lake serves as the batch layer, containing both recent and historical dat
a
•Spe
ed layer : Contains only real- time data
•Serving layer : Provides an interface to join data from the batch and speed layers
Data is loaded into both the batch and speed layers. All analytic computations are performed on data in both the batch and speed layers, which most likely requires implementation in two separate systems. Organizations address synchronization issues through trade -offs between completeness, latency , and complexity of merged 
views defined in the serving layer. Cost/benefit assessment is required to determine whether reducing latency or improving data completeness is  worth the associated cost and complexity.  
The batch layer is often referred to as the structure -over-time component (here every transaction is an insert), 
whereas in the speed layer (often referred to as an Operational Data Store or ODS), all transactions are updates (or inserts only if required). In this manner, the architecture prevents synchronization issues while simultaneously creating a current state and a history layer. This architecture usually provides its data through a 
 
Para verificar as assinaturas, acesse www.tcu.gov.br/autenticidade e informe o código 79193014.

--- Página 58 ---
506 • DMBOK2  
serving or data services layer that abstracts the data utilizing Metadata. This services layer determines where the 
data is to be ‘served’ from and appropriately provides the data requested.  
Figure 101  Services -based Architecture 
1.3.8 Machine Learning  
Machine Learning  explores the construction and study of learning algorithms. It can be viewed as a union of 
unsupervised learning methods, more commonly referred to as data mining, and supervised learning methods deeply rooted in mathematical theory , specifically statistics, combinatorics , and optimization. A third branch is 
now forming called reinforcement learning, where goal performance is earned but not specifically teacher recognized – driving a vehicle for exam ple. Programming machines to quickly learn from queries and adapt to 
changing data sets led to a completely new field within Big Data referred to as machine learning.
89 Processes 
run, and results are stored that are then used in subsequent runs to iterative ly inform the process and refine the 
results.  
Machine Learning explores the construction and study of learning algorithms. These algorithms fall into three types:  
•Supervised learning : Based on generalized rules; for example, separating SPAM from non -SPAM
email
•Unsupervised learning : Based on identifying hidden patterns (i.e., data mining)
•Reinforcement learning : Based on achieving a goal (e.g., beating an opponent at chess)
Statistical modeling and machine learning have been employed to automate otherwise costly research and development projects, by performing several trial and error passes on a vast set of data, repeating trials with the results collected, analyzed, and errors corrected. This approach can reduce time to answer dramatically and 
89 Refer to the Machine Learning resources periodic table at http://bit.ly/1DpTrHC  for an interactive guide to the differing 
platforms available for the machine learni ng developer, scientist, and practitioner.  
Source 
DataSpeed Layer
Real-time, no history
Batch LayerServing Layer
Fully processed
historyMerged view
 
Para verificar as assinaturas, acesse www.tcu.gov.br/autenticidade e informe o código 79193014.

--- Página 59 ---
BIG DATA AND DATA SCIENCE  • 507  
guide organi zational initiatives with insights based on cost effective repeatable processes. For example, 
CIVDDD uses machine learning and complex scientific data visualization techniques to help government 
agencies and peacekeepers meet the challenge of dealing with the masses of threat -related information.90  
While it taps into data in new ways, machine learning has ethical implications, especially with respect to the principle of transparency. Evidence shows that deep learning neural networks (DLNN) work. They learn things. However, it is not always clear how they learn. As the algorithms that drive these processes become more complex, they also become more opaque, functioning as ‘black boxes’. As they account for a greater number of variables and as those variables t hemselves are more abstract, algorithms test the limits of human ability to 
interpret the machine (Davenport, 2017). The need for transparency – the ability to see how decisions are made 
–will likely increase as this functionality evolves and is put to us e in a wider array of situations. (See Chapter
2.) 
1.3.9 Sentiment Analysis  
Media monitoring  and text analysis are automated methods for retrieving insights from large unstructured or 
semi -structured data, such as transaction data, social media, blogs, and web news sites. This is used to 
understand what people say and feel about brands, products,  or services, or other types of topics. Using Natural 
Language Processing (NLP) or by parsing phrases or sentences, semantic analysis can detect sentiment and also reveal changes in sentiment to predict possible scenarios.  
Consider the case of looking for key words in a posting. If the words good or great are present, this might be a 
positive response, versus seeing awful  or bad might be signs that this could be a negative response. 
Categorizing the data into the types of responses, the ‘sentiment’ of the w hole community or posting (social 
media such as Twitter, blogs, etc.) is exposed. That said, sentiment is not easily gained, as the words by themselves do not tell the whole story (i.e., I had a Great  problem with their customer service). Sentiment must 
interpret words in context. This requires an understanding of the meaning of the post – this interpretation often 
requires work using NLP functions found in such systems as IBM’s Watson.  
1.3.10 Data and Text Mining  
Data mining is a particular kind of analysis that reveals patterns in data using various algorithms. It began as an 
offshoot from Machine Learning, a subfield of Artificial Intelligence. The theory is a subset of statistical 
analysis known as  unsupervised learning where algorithms are applied to a data set without knowledge or intent 
of the desired outcome. While standard query and reporting tools ask specific questions, data mining tools help discover unknown relationships by revealing patter ns. Data mining is a key activity during the exploration 
phase as it facilitates rapid identification of studied data elements, identifies new relationships previously unknown, unclear, or unclassified, and provides structure for the classification of stud ied data elements.  
90 CIVDDD, the Centre for Innovation in Information and Data -Driven Design, is a research grant in big data analytics and 
visualization to develop next generation data discovery, design, and visualization technique s for new computational tools, 
representational strategies, and interfaces.  
 
Para verificar as assinaturas, acesse www.tcu.gov.br/autenticidade e informe o código 79193014.

--- Página 60 ---
508 • DMBOK2  
Text mining analyzes documents with text analysis and data mining techniques to classify content automatically 
into workflow -guided and SME -directed ontologies. Thus, electronic text media can be analyzed  without 
restructuring or reformatting. Ontologies can be linked into search engines, allowing for web -enabled querying 
against these documents. (See Chapter 9. ) 
Data and text mining use a range of techniques, including: 
•Profiling : Profiling attempts to c haracterize the typical behavior of an individual, group, or population.
Profiling is used to establish behavioral norms for anomaly detection applications, such as fraud
detection and monitoring for intrusions to computer systems. Profile results are inpu ts for many
unsupervised learning components.
•Data reduction : Data reduction replaces a large data set with a smaller set of data that contains much
of the important information in the larger set. The smaller data set may be easier to analyze or process.
•Association : Association is an unsupervised learning process to find relationships between studie d
e
lements based on transactions involving them. Examples of association include: Frequent item se t
m
ining, rule discovery, and market -based analysis. Recommend ation systems on the internet use this
process as well.
•Clustering : Clustering group elements in a study together by their shared characteristics. Customer
segmentation is an example of clustering.
•Self-organizing maps : Self -organizing maps  are a neural network method of cluster analysis.
Sometimes referred to as Kohonen M aps, or topologically ordered maps, they aim to reduce the
dimensionality in the evaluation space while preserving distance and proximity r elationships as muc h
a
s possible, akin to multi -dimension scaling. Reducing the dimensionality is like removing one
variable from the equation without violating the outcome. This makes it easier to solve and visualize.
1.3.11 Predictive Analytics  
Predictive Analytics  is the sub -field of supervised learning where users attempt to model data elements and 
predict future outcomes through evaluation of probability estimates. Rooted deeply in mathematics specifically statistics, predictive analytics shares many components with unsupervised learning, with the prescribed 
difference to the measurement of a desired predictive outcome.  
Predictive Analytics is the development of probability models based on variables, including historical data, related to possible events (purchases, changes in price, etc.). When it receives other pieces of information, the model triggers a reaction by the organization. The triggering factor may be an event, such as a customer adding a product to an on- line shopping basket, or it may be data in a data stream, such as a news feed or utility sensor 
data, or an increased volume of service requests. The triggering factor may be an external event. News being reported about a company is a big predictor of a change in stock price. Predicting stock movement should include monitoring news and determining if news about a company is likely to be good or bad for the stock price.  
 
Para verificar as assinaturas, acesse www.tcu.gov.br/autenticidade e informe o código 79193014.

--- Página 61 ---
BIG DATA AND DATA SCIENCE  • 509  
Frequently, the triggering factor is the accumulation of a large volume of real -time data, such as an extremely 
high number of trades or requests for service or volatility of the environment. Monitoring a data event stream 
includes incrementally building on the populated models until a threshold is reached as defined in the model.  
The am ount of time that a predictive model provides between the prediction and event predicted is frequently 
very small (seconds or less than a second). Investment in very low latency technology solutions, such as in -
memory databases, high- speed networks, and ev en physically proximity to the source of the data, optimizes an 
organization’s ability to react to the prediction.  
The simplest form of predictive model is the forecast. Many techniques exist for trending or forecasting based on regression analysis and benefit from smoothing. The simplest way to smooth data is through a moving average, or even a weighted moving average. More advanced techniques can be useful, like the exponential moving average, which introduces a smoothing factor to be applied. Minimizing the error residual from the least squares can be a starting point, but several runs are necessary to determine and optimize the smoothing factor. Double and triple exponential smoothing models exist to address trend and seasonality components.  
1.3.12 Presc riptive Analytics  
Prescriptive analytics  take predictive analytics a step farther to define actions that will affect outcomes, rather 
than just predicting the outcomes from actions that have occurred. Prescriptive analytics anticipates what will happen, when it will happen, and implies why it will happen. Because prescriptive analytics can show the implications of various decisions, it can suggest how to take advantage of an opportunity or avoid a risk. Prescriptive analytics can continually take in new data to re -predict and re -prescribe. This process can improve 
prediction accuracy and result in better prescriptions.  
1.3.13 Unstructured Data Analytics  
Unstructured data analytics  combines te xt mining, association, clustering, and other unsupervised learning 
techniques to codify large data sets. Supervised learning techniques can also be applied to provide orientation, oversight, and guidance in the coding process leveraging human intervention to resolve ambiguity when 
necessary.  
Unstructured data analytics is becoming more important as more unstructured data is generated. Some analysis is impossible without the ability to incorporate unstructured data into analytical models. However, unstructu red 
data is difficult to analyze without some way to isolate the elements of interest from extraneous elements.  
Scanning and tagging is one way to add ‘hooks’ to unstructured data that allow filtering and linking to related structured data. However, knowi ng what tags to generate based on what conditions is difficult. It is an iterative 
process, from when proposed tag conditions are identified, tags are assigned as data is ingested, then analytics uses those tags to validate the tag condition, and analyze the tagged data, which then leads to potentially changed tag conditions, or more tags.  
 
Para verificar as assinaturas, acesse www.tcu.gov.br/autenticidade e informe o código 79193014.

--- Página 62 ---
510 • DMBOK2  
1.3.14 Operational Analytics  
The concept of operational analytics  (also known as operational BI or streaming analytics) has emerged from 
the integration of real -time analytics into operations. Operational analytics includes activities like user 
segmentation, sentiment analysis, geocoding, and other techniques applied to data sets for marketing campaign 
analysis, sales penetratio n, product adoption, asset optimization, and risk management.  
Operational analytics involves tracking and integrating real -time streams of information, deriving conclusions 
based on predictive models of behavior, and triggering automatic responses and alerts. Designing the model, triggers, and responses required for successful analysis takes more analysis on the data itself. An operational analytics solution includes the preparation of historical data for pre -population of the models of behavior. For 
examp le, in a retail product model, populating a shopping basket analysis that identifies products often 
purchased together. In predicting behavior of financial markets, historical price information and historical price rate of change are regularly used. Pre- population calculations are usually performed in advance to enable timely 
responses to triggering events.  
Once predictive models have been determined to be both useful and cost effective, solutions which integrate 
historical and current data (including real -time and streaming data, structured and unstructured) are 
implemented to populate the predictive models and trigger actions based on the predictions. The solution must ensure real -time data streams using the model rules are processed correctly and automated responses to 
meaningful events in the data are generated correctly.  
1.3.15 Data Visualization91 
Visualization  is the process of interpreting concepts, ideas, and facts by using pictures or graphical 
representations. Data visualization facilitates understanding of the underlying data by presenting it in a visual summary, such as a chart or graph. Data visualizations condense and encapsulate characteristics data, making them easier to see. In d oing so, they can surface opportunities, identify risks, or highlight messages.  
Data visualizations can be delivered in a static format, such as a published report, or a more interactive on -line 
format; and some support end -user interaction where drilling or filtering capabilities facilitate analysis of data 
within the visualization. Others allow the visualization to be changed by the user on demand through innovative displays , such as data maps and moving landscapes of data over time.  
Visualization has long been critical to data analysis. Traditional BI tools include visualization options such as tables, pie charts, lines charts, area charts, bar charts, histograms, and turnkey boxes (candlesticks). To meet the growing need to understand data, the number of visualization tools has increased and techniques have improved.  
91 Data visualization is an evolving field. Principles applied in data visualization are based on design principles. See Tufte, 
2001 and McCandless 2012. Numerous web-based resources exist with examples and counter examples. See the Periodic 
Table of Visualization Methods at Visual Literacy.Org http://bit.ly/IX1bvI. 
 
Para verificar as assinaturas, acesse www.tcu.gov.br/autenticidade e informe o código 79193014.

--- Página 63 ---
BIG DATA AND DATA SCIENCE  • 511  
As data analytics matures, visualizing data in new ways will offer strategic advantages. Seeing new patterns in 
data can result in new business opportunities. As data visualization continues to evolve, organizations will have to grow their Business Intelli gence teams to compete in an increasingly data -driven world. Business analytical 
departments will seek data experts with visualization skills, including data scientists, data artists, and data vision experts, in addition to traditional information architec ts and data modelers, especially given the risks associated 
with misleading visualization. (See Chapter 2. ) 
1.3.16 Data Mashups  
Mashups  combine data and services to create visualization for insight or analysis. Many vir tualization tools 
enable mashups through functionality that relates data sources by common data elements, originally used to relate a name or descriptive text to a stored code. This client presentation mashup technique is ideal during discovery or explorat ion phases as they provide immediate benefits. This technique can be readily applied to the 
web where secured data mashups enable sharing of personal or confidential information across suppliers  or 
providers. These can couple with artificial intelligence learning algorithms to expose internet -based services 
with natural language interfaces.  
2.Activities
2.1 Define Big Data Strategy and  Business Needs  
An organization’s Big Data strategy  needs to be aligned with and s upport its overall business strategy and 
business requirements and be part of its data strategy. A Big Data strategy must include criteria to evaluate:  
•What problems the organization is trying to solve. What it needs analytics for : While one
advantage of Data Science is that it can provide a new perspective on an organization, the organizatio n
s
till needs to have a starting point. An organization may determine that the data is to be used to
understand the business or the business environment; to prove idea s about the value of new products;
to explore something that is unknown; or to invent a new way to do business. It is important t o
es
tablish a gating process to evaluate these initiatives at several phases during the implementation. Th e
v
alue and feasibility of initiatives need to be evaluated at several points in time.
•What data sources to use or acquire: Internal sources may be easy to use, but may also be limited in
scope. External sources may be useful, but are outside operational control (managed by ot hers, or not
controlled by anyone, as in the case of social media). Many vendors are competing in this space andoften multiple sources exist for the desired data elements or sets. Acquiring data that integrates withexisting ingestion items can reduce ove rall investment costs.
 
Para verificar as assinaturas, acesse www.tcu.gov.br/autenticidade e informe o código 79193014.

--- Página 64 ---
512 • DMBOK2  
•The timeliness and scope of the data to provision: Many elements can be provided in real -time
feeds, snapshots at a point in time, or even integrated and summarized. Low latency data is ideal, but
often comes at the expense of machin e learning capabilities – there is a huge difference between
computational algorithms directed to data -at-rest versus streaming. Do not minimize the level of
integration required for downstream usage.
•The impact on and relation to other data structures : There may need to be structure or content
changes in other data structures to make them suitable for integration with Big Data sets.
•Influences to existing modeled data : Including extending the knowledge on customers, products, and
marketing approaches .
The strategy will drive the scope and timing of an organization’s Big Data capability roadmap. 
2.2 Choose Data Sources 
As with any development project, the choice of data sources  for Data Science work must be driven by the  
problems the organization is trying to solve. The difference with Big Data / Data Science development is that the range of data sources is wider. It is not limited by format and can include data both external to and internal to an organization. The ability to incorporate this data into a solution also comes with risks. The quality and reliability of the data needs to be evaluated and a plan for use over time needs to be put into place. Big Data environments make it possible to quickly ingest lots of data, but to use that data and manage it over time, it is still necessary to know basic facts:  
•Its origin
•Its format
•What the data elements represent
•How it connects to other data
•How frequently it will be updated
As more data becomes available (like US Census Bureau Statistics, shopping demographics, weather satellite 
data, research data sets), data needs to be evaluated for worth and reliability. Review the available data sources, 
and the processes that create those sources and manage the plan for new sources.   
•Foundational data : Consider foundational data components such as POS (Point of Sale) in a sales
analysis.
•Granularity : Ideally, obtain data in its most granular form (not aggregated). That way it can be
aggregated for a range of purposes.
•Consistency : If possible, select data that will appear appropriately and consistently across
visualizations, or recognize limitations.
•Reliability : Choose data sources that are meaningful and credible over time. Use trusted, authoritativ
e
s
ources .
•Inspect/profile  new s ources : Test changes before adding new data sets. Unexpected material or
significant changes in visualization outcomes can occur with the inclusion of new data sources.
 
Para verificar as assinaturas, acesse www.tcu.gov.br/autenticidade e informe o código 79193014.

--- Página 65 ---
BIG DATA AND DATA SCIENCE  • 513  
Risks associated with data sources include privacy concerns. The ability to rapidly ingest and integrate data 
from a variety of sources at scale affords communities the ability to recombine data sets that were otherwise secured. Similarly, the published an alysis may describe, through summary, aggregate, or modeled  state, a sub -
set of the public that make it suddenly identifiable; this is a side effect of the ability to perform mass computation on very large populations , but publish to a very specific local or region. For example, when 
demographics computed at a national or country level quickly become non -identifiable, but not when published 
after filtering for a postal code or household level.
92 
Criteria used to select or filter data also pose a risk. These criteria should be objectively managed to avoid biases or skews. Filtering can have a material impact on visualization. Discretion is necessary when removing outliers, restricting data sets to a limited domain, or dropping sparse elements. It is common pra ctice to focus 
the provisioned data to emphasize isolation results, but it must be done objectively and uniformly.
93 (See 
Chapter  2.) 
2.3 Acquire and Ingest Data Sources  
Once the sources  are identified, they need to be found, sometimes purchased, and ingested (loaded) into the Big 
Data environment. During this process, capture critical Metadata about the source, such as its origin, size, currency, and additional knowledge about content. M any ingestion engines profile data as it is ingested, 
providing analysts with at least partial Metadata. Once the data is in a data lake, it can be assessed for suitability for multiple analysis efforts. Because building Data Science models is an iterative  process, so is data ingestion. 
Iteratively identify gaps in the current data asset base and onboard those sources. Explore these data sources using profiling, visualization, mining, or other Data Science methods to define model algorithm inputs, or model hypotheses.  
Before integrating the data, assess its quality. Assessment can be as simple querying to find out how many fields contain null values, or as complex as running a data quality toolset or data analytic utility against the data to profile, classi fy, and identify relationships between data elements. Such assessment provides insight into 
whether the data provides a valid sample from which to work, and, if so, how the data can be stored and accessed (scattered across logical processing units [MPP], f ederated, distributed by key, etc.). This work 
involves SMEs (usually the data scientists themselves) and platform engineers.  
The assessment process provides valuable insight into how the data can be integrated with other data sets, such as Master Data or  historical warehouse data. It also provides information that can be used in model training sets 
and validation activities.  
92 See Martin Fowler, Datensparsamkeit . Blog, 12 December 2013. Fowler brings into question the assumption that we 
shoul d always capture as much data as possible. He points out that the “capture it all” approach brings up privacy risks. In 
its place, he puts forth the idea of data minimization or data sparsity (from the German term Datensparsamkeit)  
http://bit.ly/1f9Nq8K . 
93 For more information on the impact of bias, which can profoundly affect the interpretation of scientific results, consult the  
following websites: INFORMS is the leading international association for Operations Research and Analytics professionals. 
http://bit.ly/2sANQRW , Statistical Society of Canada: http://bit.ly/2oz2o5H  and American Statistical Association: 
http://bit.ly/1rjAmHX . 
 
Para verificar as assinaturas, acesse www.tcu.gov.br/autenticidade e informe o código 79193014.

--- Página 66 ---
514 • DMBOK2  
2.4 Develop Data Hypotheses and  Methods 
Data Science is about building answer sets that can find meaning or insights within the data. The development 
of Data Science solutions entails building statistical models that find correlations and trends within and between 
data elements and data sets. There will be multiple answers to a question based upon inputs to a model. For example, one must choose a rate of return to calculate the future value of a financial portfolio. Models often have more than one variable so the best practice is to find deterministic outcomes – or in other words, use best 
guesses as to the values  to be expected. However, best guesses themselves should be educated. Each model will 
operate depending on the analysis method chosen. It should be tested for a range of outcomes, even the ones that appear least probable.  
Models depend on both the quality  of input data and the soundness of the model itself. Data models can often 
give insight into how to correlate the information found. An example of this is using K -Means clustering  to 
determine the number of groupings of data to analyze further. (See Chapter 13.)  
2.5 Integrate / Align Data for Analysis  
Preparing the data for analysis  involves understanding what is in the data, finding links between data from the 
various sources, and aligning common data for use.  
In many cases, joining data sources is more an art than a science. For example, consider one data set based upon daily updates and another based upon monthly updates. The daily data, in order to be aligned, would have to be aggregated  so that there would be an alignment pattern that could be used in the Data Science investigation.  
One method is to use a common model that integrates the data using a common key. Another way is to scan and join data using indexes within the database engines for similarity and record linkage algorithms and methods. 
Often data is inspected during the initial phases to understand how the data could be analyzed. Clustering helps determine the grouping of the data outputs. Other methods can find correlations that will be used to build the model to display results. Consider using techniques during the initial phases that will aide in understanding how the model will show results once published.  
Most solutions require the integration of Master Data and Reference D ata in order to interpret results of the 
analytics. (See Chapter  10.) 
2.6 Explore Data Using Models  
2.6.1 Populate Predictive Model 
Configuring predictive models  includes pre -populating the model with historical informatio n concerning the 
customer, market, products, or other factors that are included in the model other than the triggering factor. Pre-population calculations are usually performed in advance to enable the fastest response to triggering events. For 
 
Para verificar as assinaturas, acesse www.tcu.gov.br/autenticidade e informe o código 79193014.

--- Página 67 ---
BIG DATA AND DATA SCIENCE  • 515  
example, cu stomer purchase history would be needed to pre -populate a retail market -basket recommendation 
model. In predicting behavior of retail markets, historical price and price change information are combined with 
customer, demographic, and weather information.  
2.6.2 Train the Model 
Execute the model against the data in order to ‘train’ the model. Training includes repeated runs of the model against the data to verify assumptions. Training will result in changes to the model. Training requires balance. Avoid over -fitting by training against a limited data fold.  
Model validation must be complete before transitioning to production. Address any population imbalances or data biases with model offsets that are trained and validated; this can be tweaked in production as the initial offset is gradually adjusted through actual population interactions. Optimizing feature mix can be accomplished with Bayesian co -selection, classifier inversion, or rule induction. Models can also be combined for ensemble 
learning where the predictor model is built by combining the collected strengths of simpler models.  
Identifying outliers or anomalies (data objects that do not comply with the general behavior exhibited by the studied elements) is critical to the evaluating the model. For more volatile datasets, apply a variance test based 
on the average and standard deviation. Both tests can be readily applied on profiled results. It may be that the 
outliers are the target of the exercise, as opposed to finding and validating trends in the majority of the data.  
For predictive analytics, use a real -time data stream to finish the population of the predictive model and trigger 
a response, which might be an alert or an event. The data stream may require special focus on design and development of an extreme low latency processing capability. In some models, the difference in value of the 
predictions between fractions of a second is extreme and solutions may require innovative technology with speed of light limitations.  
Models can use many statistical functions and techniques that are available in open source libraries, one of which is ‘R.’ The R Project for Statistical Computing is a free software environment for statistical computing; it contains many functions as service calls.
94 Custom functions can be developed levera ging the scripting 
language and shared across tools, platforms, and organizations.  
Once the solution design has been created and development and operation estimated, the organization may decide whether to develop the solution to predict behavior. Real- time operational analytics solutions frequently 
require substantial amounts of new architecture and development and could possibly not be cost effective.  
2.6.3 Evaluate Model  
Once the data is placed onto a platform and ready for analysis, the Data Science begins. The model is 
constructed, evaluated against training sets, and validated. Refinements to the business requirements are 
94 For more information, visit the R -Project website:  http://bit.ly/19WExR5 . 
 
Para verificar as assinaturas, acesse www.tcu.gov.br/autenticidade e informe o código 79193014.

--- Página 68 ---
516 • DMBOK2  
expected at this point and early feasibility metrics can guide the management efforts towards furt her processing 
or discarding. It is entirely possible that testing a new hypothesis will require additional data sets.  
Data scientists run queries and algorithms against the data to see if any insights become apparent. Often times a 
number of different mat hematical functions will be run to see if any insight is found (clusters in the data, 
patterns that start to emerge between data element periods, etc.). During this period, data scientists are often building upon insights found in iterative batches. From t hese, models can be developed that display the 
correlation between data elements and insights.  
There is an ethical component to practicing Data Science and it needs to be applied when evaluating models. 
Models can have unexpected results or unintentionall y reflect the assumptions and biases of the people who 
create them. Ethical training should be required for all artificial intelligence (AI) practitioners. Ideally, the curriculum for every student learning AI, computer science, or Data Science should incl ude ethics and security 
topics. However, ethics alone is not sufficient. Ethics can help practitioners understand their responsibilities to all stakeholders, but ethical training needs to be augmented with the technical capability to put good intentions into practice by taking technical precautions as a system is built and tested (Executive Office, 2016). (See 
Chapter  2.) 
2.6.4 Create Data Visualizations 
Data visualization  based  on the model must meet the specific needs related to the purpose of the model. Each 
visualization should answer a question or provide an insight. Establish the purpose and parameters for the visualization: a point in time status, trends vs. exceptions, re lationships between moving parts, geographical 
differences, or some other point.  
Select the appropriate visual to fulfill that purpose. Ensure that the visualization addresses an audience; adjust 
the layout and complexity to highlight and simplify accordi ngly. Not all audiences are ready for a complex 
interactive chart. Support visualizations with explanatory text.  
Visualizations should tell a story. Data ‘story telling’ can link new questions to the context of data exploration. Data stories must be suppor ted by related data visualizations to have the best effect.  
2.7 Deploy and Monitor  
A model that meets business needs in a feasible manner can be deployed to production for ongoing monitoring. Such models will require refinement and maintenance. Several modeling techniques are available for implementation. Models can serve batch processes as well as real -time integration messages. They can also be 
embedded into analytics software as input into decision management systems, historical analysis, or performance management dashboards.  
 
Para verificar as assinaturas, acesse www.tcu.gov.br/autenticidade e informe o código 79193014.

--- Página 69 ---
BIG DATA AND DATA SCIENCE  • 517  
2.7.1 Expose Insights and Findings  
The presentation of findings and data insights, usually through data visualization, is the final step in a Data 
Science investigation. Insights should be connected to action i tems so that the organization benefits from the 
Data Science work.  
New relationships may be explored through data visualization techniques. As a model is used, changes in the 
underlying data and relationships may surface, telling a new story about the dat a. 
2.7.2 Iterate with Additional Data Sources  
The presentation of findings and data insights usually generates questions that start a new process of research. 
Data Science is iterative, so Big Data development is iterative to support it. This process of le arning from a 
specific set of data sources often leads to the need for different or additional data sources to both support the conclusions found and to add insights to the existing model(s).  
3.T ools
Advances in technology (Moore’s Law, the proliferation of hand held devices, IOT, to name a few) have 
created the Big Data and Data Science industry. To understand the industry, one must understand its drivers. 
This section will explain the tools and technologies that have enabled Big Data Science to emerge.  
The advent of Massively Parallel Processing (MPP)  was one of the first enablers to Big Data and Data Science 
as it provided the means to analyze huge volumes of information in relatively short amounts of time. Finding the needle in the haystack of information, or using machinery to plow through tons of dirt to find the gold nuggets is what we are doing today. Th is trend will continue.  
Other advances that have changed the way we look at data and information include:  
•Advanced in -database analytics
•Analytics on unstructured data (Hadoop, MapReduce)
•Integration of analytic results with operational systems
•Data visualizations across multiple media and devices
•Linking structured and unstructured information using semantics
•New data sources using IOT
•Advanced visualization capabilities
•Data enrichment capabilities
•Collaboration technologies and toolsets
Existing da ta warehouses, data marts, and operational data stores (ODS) are being augmented to carry Big Data 
workload. NoSQL technologies allow storage and query of unstructured and semi -structured data.  
 
Para verificar as assinaturas, acesse www.tcu.gov.br/autenticidade e informe o código 79193014.

--- Página 70 ---
518 • DMBOK2  
Access to unstructured data used to occur largely through a batch query interface that resulted in slow scheduled 
execution and poor response times. Several NoSQL databases are now available with designs that address specific limitations in this acquisition process. Scalable distributed databases automatically provide sharding capabilities (the ability to scale across servers natively) for parallel query execution. Of course, as with any other database, structural definition and mapping to unstructured data sets remain largely manual  processes.  
Immediate query, reporting, and analysis capabilities can be satisfied with Big Data in -memory technologies 
that allow end users to construct SQL -like queries to access unstructured data. There are also adaptors to SQL 
for some tools that will transmit a NoSQL process and return a SQL compliant query – with limitations and 
caveats. Adaptor technologies can allow existing tools to be used for unstructured data query.  
Decision criteria tool sets, process implementation tools, and professional services offerings can both facilitate and expedite the process of choosing an initial set of tools. As when acquiring BI tools, it is critical to evaluate all options: build, buy, or rent (provisioned as software -as-a-service). As noted in Chapter 11,  cloud sourcing 
tools and the associated expertise should be weighed against the cost of building from scratch or deploying purchased products from vendors. Ongoing upgrade and potential replacement costs must be considered as well. Alignment to a set OLA can bridge forecasted costs and provide i nput into setting compelling fees and penalties 
for term violations.  
3.1 MPP Shared -nothing Technologies and  Architecture 
Massively Parallel Processing (MPP)  Shared -nothing Database technologies  have become the standard platform 
for Data Science -oriented analysis of Big Data sets. In MPP databases, data is partitioned (logically distributed) 
across multiple processing servers (computational nodes), with each  server having its own dedicated memory to 
process data locally. Communication between processing servers is usually controlled by a master host and occurs over a network interconnect. There is no disk sharing or memory contention, hence the name, ‘shared -
nothing’.  
MPP has evolved because traditional computing paradigms (indexes, distributed data sets, etc.) did not provide acceptable response times on massive tables. Even the most powerful of computing platforms (Cray computer) would take many hours or eve n days to compute a complex algorithm against a trillion -row table.  
Consider now a number of commodity hardware servers, all lined up in a row and controlled via a host. Each is sent part of the query to run against this segmented or distributed trillion-r ow table. If there are, for example, 
1000 processing servers, the query changes from accessing a trillion rows in one table to accessing 1000 billion -
row tables. This type of computing architecture is linearly scalable, which adds to the appeal for data scientist and Big Data users requiring a scalable platform to incorporate growth.  
This technology also enabled in- database analytical functions – the ability to execute analytical functions (like 
K-means Clustering, Regression, etc.) at the processor level. Distribution of workload to the processor level 
greatly speeds up analytical queries – thereby fueling innovation in Data Science.  
A system that automatically distributes data and parallelizes query workloads across all available (localized) hardware is th e optimum solution for Big Data analytics.  
 
Para verificar as assinaturas, acesse www.tcu.gov.br/autenticidade e informe o código 79193014.

--- Página 71 ---
BIG DATA AND DATA SCIENCE  • 519  
Figure 102  Columnar Appliance Architecture95 
Data volumes are growing fast. Companies can grow the capacity and performance of their systems over t ime 
by adding new nodes. MPP makes it easy to expand the parallelism of hundreds or thousands of cores across an 
ever-growing pool of machines. A massively parallel, shared -nothing architecture fully uses each core, with 
linear scalability and increased processing performance on large data sets.  
3.2 Distributed File -based Databases  
Distributed file -based solutions technologies , such as the open source Hadoop , are an inexpensive  way to store 
large amounts of data in different formats. Hadoop stores files of any type – structured, semi -structured, and 
unstructured. Using a configuration similar to MPP Shared -nothing (an MPP foundation for file storage), it 
shares files across proc essing servers. It is ideal for storing data securely (as many copies are made), but has 
challenges when trying to allow access to data via structured or analytical mechanism (like SQL).  
Due to its relatively low cost, Hadoop has become the landing zone o f choice for many organizations. From 
Hadoop, data can be moved to MPP Shared -nothing databases to have algorithms run against it. Some 
organizations run complex Data Science queries in Hadoop, and are not concerned with response times in the order of hour s and days (rather than minutes for the former architecture).  
The language used in file -based solutions is called MapReduce. This language has three main steps:  
•Map : Identify and obtain the data to be analyzed
•Shuffle : Combine the data according to the analytical patterns desired
95 Image Source:  “Greenplum Database 4.0: Critical Mass Innovation”, White Paper, August 2010. 
SQL 
MapReduce
Master 
Servers
Interconnect 
Bus
Segment 
Servers
External 
Sources
 
Para verificar as assinaturas, acesse www.tcu.gov.br/autenticidade e informe o código 79193014.

--- Página 72 ---
520 • DMBOK2  
•Reduce : Remove duplication or perform aggregation in order to reduce the size of the resulting dat a
se
t to only what is required
These steps can be combined in many different tools in different ways, both in sequence and in parallel, to do 
complex manipulations.  
3.3 In-d atabase Algorithms  
An in -database algorithm  uses the principle that each of the processors in a MPP Shared -nothing  platform can 
run queries independently, so a new form of analyti cs processing could be accomplished by providing 
mathematical and statistical functions at the computing node level.  Open -source libraries of scalable in -database 
algorithms for machine learning, statistics, and other analytical tasks were designed both fo r in- and out -of-core 
execution, and for the shared -nothing parallelism offered by modern parallel database engines, ensuring that 
computation is done close to the data. By moving the computation closer to the data, the computing time is dramatically reduced for complex algorithms (such as K -means Clustering, Logistic or Linear regression, 
Mann -Whitney U Test, Conjugate Gradient, Cohort Analysis, etc.) . 
3.4 Big Data Cloud Solutions  
There are vendors who provide cloud storage  and integr ation for Big Data, including analytic capabilities. 
Based on defined standards, customers load their data a cloud environment. The vendor enhances the data, either as open data sets or as provided by other organizations. The customer can do analytics and Data Science 
using the combined data set. One application uses retail offers as the subject for the data, combines it with geographic and sales data, and offers airline miles for customers who agree to have their data used in this way.  
3.5 Statistical Computing and Graphical Languages  
R is an open source scripting language and environment for statistical computing and graphics. It provides a 
wide variety of statistical techniques su ch as linear and nonlinear mode ling, classical statistical tests, time -series 
analysis, classification, and clustering. Because it is a scripting language, models developed in R  can be 
implemented in a variety of environments, differing platforms and collaborated development across multiple geogr aphic and organizational boundaries. The R  environment can also produce publication- quality plots, 
including mathematical symbols and formulae, within the control of the end user.  
3.6 Data Visualization  Tools  
Traditional tools in  data visualization have both a data and a graphical component. Advanced visualization and 
discovery tools use in -memory architecture to allow users to interact with the data. Patterns in a large data set 
 
Para verificar as assinaturas, acesse www.tcu.gov.br/autenticidade e informe o código 79193014.

--- Página 73 ---
BIG DATA AND DATA SCIENCE  • 521  
can be difficult to recognize in a numbers display.  A visual pattern can be picked up quickly when thousands of 
data points are loaded into a sophisticated display.  
Information graphics or infographics are graphical representations stylized for effective interaction and 
comprehension. Marketing adopted these to provide visual appeal to presentations. Journalists, bloggers, and teachers found infographics useful for trend analysis, presentation, and distribution. Information visualization methods like radar charts, parallel coordinate plots, tag charts, heat  maps, and data maps are now supported by 
many toolsets. These allow users to rapidly discern changes in data over time, gain insights into related items, and understand potential cause and effect relationships before impacts occur. These tools have several benefits over traditional visualization tools:  
•Sophisticated analysis and visualization types, such as small multiples, spark lines, heat maps,histograms, wate rfall charts, and bullet graphs
•Built- in adherence to visualization best practices
•Interacti vity enabling visual discovery
4.Te chniques
4.1 Analytic Modeling  
Several open source tools are available for development, as well as cloud data processing for model  
development, for visual development process, for web scraping, and for linear programming optimization. To share and execute models by other applications, look for tools that support the predictive model markup language (PMML) , an XML -based file format.  
Real-time access can resolve many latency issues from batch processing. The Apache Mahout  is an open source 
project aimed at creating a machine -learning library. Mahout is positioned to automate Big Data exploration 
through recommendati on mining, document classification, and item clustering. This branch of development 
efforts bypasses the traditional batch query MapReduce data access techniques. Leveraging an API interface 
directly into the storage layer HDFS , a variety of data access techniques can be provided such as SQL, content 
streaming, machine learning, and graphics libraries for data visualization.  
Analytic models are associated wi th different depths of analysis:  
•Descriptive modeling  summarizes or represents the data structures in a compact manner. This
approach does not always validate a causal hypothesis or predict outcomes. However, it does us
e
al
gorithms to define or refine relationships across variables in a way that could provid e input to suc h
a
nalysis.
•Explanatory modeling is the application of statistical models to data for testing causal hypothesis
about theoretical constructs. While it uses techniques similar to data mining and predictive analytics,
 
Para verificar as assinaturas, acesse www.tcu.gov.br/autenticidade e informe o código 79193014.

--- Página 74 ---
522 • DMBOK2  
its purpose is different.  It does not predict outcomes; it seeks to match model results only with existing 
data.  
Key to predictive analytics is to learn by example through training the model. Performance of a learning method 
relates its predictive abilities on independent test da ta. Assessment guides the choice of learning and measures 
the quality of the chosen model. Model selection estimates performance where assessment evaluates the generalization error on new data.  
Avoid over -fitting – a situation that occurs when the model i s trained against non -representative datasets, is 
overly complex in relation to its data, or has described noise instead of the underlying relationship(s). Use 
additional techniques such as K -fold validation to indicate when training is no longer resulting  in better 
generalization.  
Train ing error consistently decrease with model complexity and can drop off to zero. Therefore, it is not a 
useful estimate of the test error. Randomly divide the data set into three parts to form training, testing, and validation sets. The training set is used to fit the model, the validation set is used to predict error for selection, and the test set is used for assessment of the generalization error of the final model.  
Reusing the same test -set repeatedly can underestimate the true test error. Ideally, perform cross -validation by 
randoml y dividing the data set into a set of K -folds or cross -validation groups. Perform training on all but one 
set of data based on strongly correlated predictor variables. Test the model on the remaining piece and 
determine generalization error based on all K -folds. Several statistical tests can be applied and performed to 
numerical ly assess contextual model validity.  
4.2 Big Data Modeling  
Modeling Big Data  is a technical challenge but critical if an organization that wants to describe and govern its 
data. Traditional Enterprise Data Architecture principles do apply; data needs to be integrated, specified, and managed.  
The main driver to physically model a data warehouse is to enable population of data for query performan ce. 
This driver is not in play for Big Data. This is not an excuse to abandon the modeling process or to hand it off to a developer. The value of modeling the data is that it enables people to understand data content. Apply proven 
data mode ling techniques while accounting for the variety of sources. Develop the subject area model, at least 
in a summarized way, so it can be related to proper contextual entities and placed into the overall roadmap, just like any other kind of data. The challenge is to make an  understandable and useful picture out of these large 
data sets, and for a justifiable cost.  
Understand how the data links between data sets. For data of different granularity, prevent combinations that 
count data elements or values more than once; for example, don’t combine atomic and aggregate sets.  
 
Para verificar as assinaturas, acesse www.tcu.gov.br/autenticidade e informe o código 79193014.

--- Página 75 ---
BIG DATA AND DATA SCIENCE  • 523  
5.Implementation Guidelines
Many of the general principles of managing warehouse data apply to managing Big Data: ensuring that the data 
sources are reliable, having sufficient Metadata to enable data use, managing the quality of data, figuring out 
how to integrate data from different sources, and ensuring that data is secure and protected. (See Chapters  6, 7, 
and 8. ) The differences in implementing a Big Data environment are connected to a set of unknowns: how the 
data will be used, which data will be valuable, how long it needs to be retained.  
Data velocity may lead people to think they do not have time to implement controls. This is a dangerous 
assumption. With larger data sets, managing ingestion and inve ntorying data in a lake is critical to preventing it 
from becoming a swamp.  
Ingestion may not always require organizational ownership or commitment to the data set being studied. Consider leasing a Big Data platform for finite periods to explore data of i nterest. Exploration can quickly 
determine which areas show potential value. Do this before ingesting into the organizational data lake, data store, or data staging area; once landed, it can be awkward to remove.  
5.1 Strategy Alignment  
Any Big Data / Data Science program should be strategically aligned with organizational objectives. Establishing a Big Data strategy drives activities related to user community, data security, Metadata management, including lineage, and Data Quality Management.  
The strategy should document goals, approach, and governance principles. The ability to leverage Big Data 
requires building organizational skills and capabilities. Use capability management to align business and IT initiatives and project a roadmap. Strategy deliverabl es should account for managing:  
•Information lifecycle
•Metadat
a
•D
ata quality
•Data acquisition
•Data access and security
•Data governan ce
•D
ata privacy
•Learning and adoption
•Operations
5.2 Readiness Assessment / Risk Assessment  
As with any development  project, implementation of a Big Data or Data Science initiative should align with real 
business needs. Assess organizational readiness in relation to critical success factors:  
 
Para verificar as assinaturas, acesse www.tcu.gov.br/autenticidade e informe o código 79193014.

--- Página 76 ---
524 • DMBOK2  
•Business relevance: How w ell do the Big Data / Data Science initiatives and their corresponding use
cases align with the company’s business? To succeed, they must strongly enforce a business functio n
or
 process.
•Business readiness:  Is the business partner prepared for a long -term incremental delivery? Have the y
co
mmitted themselves to establishing centers of excellence to sustain the product in future releases?
How broad is the average knowledge or skill gap within the target community and can that be crossed
within a single increm ent?
•E
conomic viability : Has the proposed solution considered conservatively the tangible and intangibl e
be
nefits? Has assessment of ownership costs accounted for the option of buying or leasing items versus
building from scratch?
•Prototype : Can the proposed solution be prototyped for a subset of the end user community for a finite
timeframe to demonstrate proposed value? Big bang implementations can cause big dollar impacts an d
a
 proving ground can mitigate these delivery risks.
Likely the m ost challenging decisions will be around data procurement, platform development, and resourcing. 
•Many sources exist for digital data stores and not all need to be in -house owned and operated. Some
can be procured while others can be leased.
•Multiple tools and techniques are on the market; matching to general needs will be a challenge.
•Securing staff with specific skills in a timely manner and retaining top talent during an implementationmay require consideration of alternatives including professional services, cloud sourcing orcollaborating.
•The time to build in -house talent may well exceed the delivery window.
5.3 Organization and Cultural Change  
Business people must be fully engaged in order to realize benefits from the advanced analytics. A 
communic ations and education program is required to affect  this. A Center of Excellence  can provide training, 
start-up sets, design best practices, data source tips and tricks, and other point solutions or artifacts to help 
empower business users towards a self- service model. In addition to knowledge management, this center can 
provide timely communications across the developer, designer, analyst, and data consumer communities.  
As with DW/BI, a Big Data implementation will bring together of a number of key cross -functional roles, 
including:  
•Big Data Platform Architect : Hardware, operating systems, filesystem s, and services .
•Ingestion  Architect : Data analysis, systems of record, data modeling, and data mapping. Provides or
supports mapping of sources to the Hadoop cluster for query and analysis.
•Metadata Specialist : Metadata interfaces, Metadata architecture, and contents.
•Analytic Design Lead : End user analytic design, best practice guidance implementation in related
toolsets, and end user result set facilitation .
 
Para verificar as assinaturas, acesse www.tcu.gov.br/autenticidade e informe o código 79193014.

--- Página 77 ---
BIG DATA AND DATA SCIENCE  • 525  
•Data Scientist : Provides architecture and model design consultation based on theoretical knowledge of
statistics and computability, delivery on appropriate tools and technical application to functiona l
r
equirements.
6.B ig Data and Data Science Governan ce
Big Data, like other data, requires governance. Sourcing, source analysis, ingestion, enrichment, and publishing 
processes require business as well as technical controls, addressing such questions as:  
•Sourcing : What to source, when to source, what is the best source of data for particular study
•Sharing : What data sharing agreements and contracts to enter into, terms and conditions both inside
and outside the organizatio n
•M
etadata : What the data means on the source side, how to interpret the results on th e output side
•Enrichment : Whether to enrich the data, how to enrich the data, and the benefits of enriching the dat a
•A
ccess : What to publish, to whom, how , and whe n
A
n enterprise view of data should drive decisions on data handling. 
6.1 Visualization C hannels Management  
A critical success factor in implementing a Data Science approach is the alignment of the appropriate visualization tools to the user community. Depending on the size and nature of the organization, there are likely many different visual ization tools being applied in a variety of processes. Ensure that users understand the 
relative complexity of the visualization tools. Sophisticated users will have increasingly complex demands. Coordination between enterprise architecture, portfolio management, and maintenance teams will be necessary to control visualization channels within and across the portfolio. Be aware that changing data providers or selection criteria will likely have downstream impacts to the elements available for visualization, which can 
impact the effectiveness of tools.  
6.2 Data Science and Visualization Standards  
It is a best practice to establish a community that defines and publishes visualization standards and guidelines and reviews artifacts within a specified delivery method; this is particularly vital for customer - and regulatory -
facing content. Standards may include:  
•Tools standards by analytic paradigm, user community, subject area
•Requests for new dat
a
•D
ata set process standard
 
Para verificar as assinaturas, acesse www.tcu.gov.br/autenticidade e informe o código 79193014.

--- Página 78 ---
526 • DMBOK2  
•Processes for neutral and expert presentation to avoid biased results, and to ensure that all elements
included have been done so in a fair and consistent manner including:
oData inclusion and exclusio n
oA
ssumptions in the models
oStatistical validity of results
oValidity of interpretation o f results
oAppropriate methods applied
6.3 Data Security  
Having a reliable process to secure data is itself an organizational asset. Policies for hand ling and securing Big 
Data should be established and monitored. These policies should account for how to pr event misuse of personal 
data and to secure it through its overall lifecycle.  
Securely provision appropriate levels of data for authorized personnel and make subscription data accessible according to agreed -upon levels. Align services to user communities so that special services can be created to 
provision private data for those communities allowed to ingest it, and mask the data for others. Often 
organizations create policies for access to information that are not to be violated (such as no access by name, address, or phone number). In order to secure information that is highly sensitive ( social security number , credit 
card numbers , etc.), data will be stored using encryption techniques that obfuscate the information. Encryption 
can be chosen that, for example, has the same ‘content’ when encrypted, so that patterns may be exposed without knowing the actual values.  
Recombination measures the ability to reconstitute sensitive or private data. This capability must be managed as 
part of the Big Data security p ractice. The outcomes of the analysis may violate privacy, even though the actual 
data elements can only be inferred. Understanding the outcomes at the Metadata Management level is critical to avoid this and other potential security violations. This requir es knowledge of the intended consumption or 
analysis to be performed and by what role. Some trusted persons within the organization will be granted the ability to read this data when necessary, but not everyone, and certainly not for deep analysis. (See Ch apters  2 
and 7. ) 
6.4 Metadata 
As part of a Big Data initiative, an organization will bring together data sets that were created using different 
approaches and standards. Integration of such data is challenging. Metadata related to these data sets is criti cal 
to their successful use. Metadata needs to be carefully managed as part of data ingestion, or the data lake will 
quickly become a data swamp. The user community must have tools that enable them to create a master list of data sets with Metadata that characterizes the structure, content, and quality of the data, including the source and lineage of the data and the definition and intended uses of entities and data elements. Technical Metadata can be harvested from a variety of Big Data tools including data storage layers, data integration, MDM, and 
 
Para verificar as assinaturas, acesse www.tcu.gov.br/autenticidade e informe o código 79193014.

--- Página 79 ---
BIG DATA AND DATA SCIENCE  • 527  
even the source filesystems. Consideration of real -time feeds versus data at rest versus computational data 
elements is necessary to complete the source side lineage.  
6.5 Data Quality  
Data Quality is a measure of deviation from an expected result: the smaller the difference, the better the data 
meets expectation, and the higher the quality. In an engineered environment, standards for quality should be easy to define (though practice shows that they are not or that many organizations do not take the time to define them). Some people have raised the question of whether data quality even matters for Big Data. Common sense says it does. For analytics to be reliable, the underlying data must be reliable. In Big Data p rojects, it may seem 
very difficult to determine the quality of data, but an effort needs to be made to assess quality in order to have confidence in the analysis. This can be done through an initial assessment, which is necessary to understand the data, and through that, the identification of measurements for subsequent instances of the data set. Data quality assessment will produce valuable Metadata that will be necessary input to any effort to integrate data.  
Consider that most mature Big Data organizat ions scan data input sources using data quality toolsets to 
understand the information contained within. Most advanced data quality toolsets offer functionality that 
enables an organization to test assumptions and build knowledge about its data. For exampl e:  
•Discovery : Where information resides within the data set
•Classification : What types of information are present based upon standardized patterns
•Profiling : How the data is populated and structured
•Mapping : What other data sets can be matched to these v alues
Just as in DW/BI, it is tempting to put data quality assessment last. Without it, though, it may be difficult to know what Big Data represents or how to make connections between data sets. Integration will be necessary, and the likelihood that data f eeds will be provisioned with identical structures and elements is very nearly zero. 
This means for example, codes and other potential linking data will likely vary from data provider to data provider. Without initial assessment, such conditions will go un noticed until an analytic need is expressed that 
attempts to merge or combine those providers.  
6.6 Metrics  
Metrics are vital to  any management process; they not only quantify activity, but can define the variation 
between what is observed and what is desired.  
6.6.1 Technical Usage Metrics  
Many of the Big Data tools offer insightful administrator reporting capabilities that interact directly with the contents queried by the user community. Technical usage analysis looks for data hot spots (most frequently 
 
Para verificar as assinaturas, acesse www.tcu.gov.br/autenticidade e informe o código 79193014.

--- Página 80 ---
528 • DMBOK2  
accessed data) in order to manage data distribution and preserve performance. Growth rates also feed into 
capacity planning.  
6.6.2 Loading and Scanning Metrics  
Loading and scanning metrics define the ingestion rate and interaction with the user community. As each new data source is acquired,  loading metrics are expected to spike and then level as that source is fully ingested. 
Real-time feeds may be served through service queries, but can also appear as scheduled extracts are processed; 
for these feeds, expect a constant increase in data loading.  
The application layer(s) would likely provide the best data usage metrics from execution logs. Monitor the consumption or access through available Metadata, which can guide usage analysis by showing query execution plans that have occurred most frequently.  
Scanning metrics should be combined with any query processing that may occur outside of the analytical processing itself. Administrative tools should be able to provide this level of reporting, as well as overall service health.  
6.6.3 Learnings and S tories 
In order to show value, the Big Data / Data Science program must measure tangible outcomes that justify the 
cost of developing solutions and managing process changes. Metrics can include quantification of benefits, cost 
prevention or avoidance, as well as length of time between initiation and realized benefits. Common 
measurements include  
•Counts and accuracy of models and patterns develope d
•R
evenue realization from identified opportunities
•Cost reduction from avoiding identified threats
Sometimes,  the outcomes of the analytics tell stories that can lead to organization re- direction, re -vitalization, 
and new opportunity. One measurement can be a count of new projects and initiatives generated by marketing and senior executives.  
7.W orks Cited / Recommended
Abate, Robert, Peter Aiken and  Joseph Burke. Integrating Enterprise Applications Utilizing A Services Based Architecture . 
John Wiley and  Sons, 1997. Print.  
Arthur, Lisa. Big Data Marketing: Engage Your Customers More Effectively and Drive Value . Wiley, 2013. Print.  
Barlow, Mike. Real -Time Big Data Analytics: Emerging Architecture . O'Reilly Media, 2013. Kindle.  
 
Para verificar as assinaturas, acesse www.tcu.gov.br/autenticidade e informe o código 79193014.

--- Página 81 ---
BIG DATA AND DATA SCIENCE  • 529  
Davenport, Thomas H. “Beyond the Black Box in analytics and Cognitive.” DataInformed  (website), 27 February, 2017. 
http://bit.ly/2sq8uG0  Web. 
Davenport, Thomas H. Big Data at Work: Dispelling the Myths, Uncovering the Opportunities . Harvard Business Review 
Press, 2014. Print.  
EMC Education Services, ed. Data Science and Big Data Analytics: Discovering, Analyzing, Visualizing and Presenting 
Data. Wiley, 2015. Print.  
Executive Office of the President, National Science and Technology Council Committee on Technology. Preparing for the 
Future of Artificial Intelligence . October 2016. http://bit.ly/2j3XA4k . 
Inmon, W.H., and Dan Linstedt. Data Archi tecture: A Primer for the Data Scientist: Big Data, Data Warehouse and Data 
Vault . 1st Edition. Morgan Kaufmann, 2014.   
Jacobs, Adam. “Pathologies of Big Data.” AMCQUEU, Volume 7, Issue 6. July 6, 2009. http://bit.ly/1vOqd80. Web 
Janssens, Jeroen. Data Sci ence at the Command Line: Facing the Future with Time -Tested Tools . O'Reilly Media, 2014. 
Print.  
Kitchin, Rob. The Data Revolution: Big Data, Open Data, Data Infrastructures and Their Consequences . SAGE 
Publications Ltd, 2014. Print.  
Krishnan, Krish. Data Warehousing in the Age of Big Data . Morgan Kaufmann, 2013. Print.  The Morgan Kaufmann Series 
on Business Intelligence.  
Lake, Peter and Robert Drake. Information Systems Management in the Big Data Era. Springer, 2015. Print. Advanced 
Information and Knowledge Processing.  
Lake, Peter. A Guide to Handling Data Using Hadoop: An exploration of Hadoop, Hive, Pig, Sqoop and Flume . Peter Lake, 
2015. Kindle. Advanced Information and Knowledge Processing.  
Laney, Doug. “3D Data Management: Controlling Data Volume, Velocity, and Variety.” The Meta Group [Gartner]. 6 
February 2001. http://gtnr.it/1bKflKH . 
Loshin, David. Big Data Analytics: From Strategic Planning to Enterprise Integration with Tools , Techniques, NoSQL, and 
Graph. Morgan Kaufmann, 2013. Print.  
Lublinsky,  Boris, Kevin T. Smith, Alexey Yakubovich. Professional Hadoop Solutions . Wrox, 2013. Print.  
Luisi, James. Pragmatic Enterprise Architecture: Strategies to Transform Information Systems in the Era of Big Data . 
Morgan Kaufmann, 2014. Print.  
Marz, Nathan and James Warren. Big Data: Principles and best practices of scalable realtime data systems . Manning 
Publications, 2014. Print.  
McCandless, David. Information is Beautiful . Collins, 2012.  
Provost, Foster and Tom Fawcett. Data Science for Business: What you need to know about data mining and data-analytic 
thinking. O'Reilly Media, 2013. Print.  
Salminen, Joni and Valtteri Kaartemo, eds. Big Data: Definitions, Business Logics, and Best Practices to Apply in Your Business. Amazon Digital Services, Inc., 2014. Kin dle. Books for Managers Book 2.  
Sathi, Arvind. Big Data Analytics: Disruptive Technologies for Changing the Game . Mc Press, 2013. Print. 
Sawant, Nitin and Himanshu Shah. Big Data Application Architecture Q &A: A Problem - Solution Approach. Apress, 2013. 
Print. Expert’s Voice in Big Data.  
Slovic, Scott, Paul Slovic, eds. Numbers and Nerves: Information, Emotion, and Meaning in a World of Data. Oregon State University Press, 2015. Print.  
 
Para verificar as assinaturas, acesse www.tcu.gov.br/autenticidade e informe o código 79193014.

--- Página 82 ---
530 • DMBOK2  
Starbird, Michael. Meaning from Data: Statistics Made Clear  (The Great  Courses, Parts 1 and 2). The Teaching Company, 
2006. Print.  
Tufte, Edward R. The Visual Display of Quantitative Information . 2nd ed. Graphics Pr., 2001. Print.  
van der Lans, Rick. Data Virtualization for Business Intelligence Systems: Revolutionizing Data  Integration for Data 
Warehouses. Morgan Kaufmann, 2012. Print. The Morgan Kaufmann Series on Business Intelligence.  
van Rijmenam, Mark. Think Bigger: Developing a Successful Big Data Strategy for Your Business . AMACOM, 2014. Print.  
 
Para verificar as assinaturas, acesse www.tcu.gov.br/autenticidade e informe o código 79193014.

--- Página 83 ---
CHAPTER 1 5  
Data Management Maturity Assessment  
1.Introduction
apability Maturity Assessment (CMA) is an approach to process improvement based on a framework – 
a Capability Maturity Model (CMM) – that describes how characteristics of a process evolve from ad 
hoc to optimal. The CMA concept grew out of efforts by the United States Department of Defense to 
establish criteria through which to evaluate software contractors. In the mid -1980s, the Capabilit y Maturity 
Model for Software was published by the Software Engineering Institute of Carnegie -Mellon University. While 
first applied to software development, CMMs have been developed for a range of other fields, including data 
management.  
Maturity models are defined in terms of a progression through levels that describe process characteristics. When 
an organization gains an understanding of process characteristics, it can evaluate its level of maturity and put in place a plan to improve its capabilities. I t can also measure improvement and compare itself to competitors or 
partners, guided by the levels of the model. With each new level, process execution becomes more consistent, predictable, and reliable. Processes improve as they take on characteristics of  the levels. Progression happens in 
a set order. No level can be skipped. Levels commonly include:
96 
•Level 0 : Absence of capability
•Level 1 : Initial or Ad Hoc: Success depends on the competence of individuals
•Level 2 : Repeatable: Minimum process discipline is in pl ace
•L
evel 3 : Defined: Standards are set and used
•Level 4 : Managed: Processes are quantified and controlled
•Level 5 : Optimized: Process improvement goals are quantified
Within each level, criteria are described across process features. For example,  a maturity model may include 
criteria related to how processes are executed, including the level of automation of those processes. It may focus on policies and controls, as well as process details.  
96 Adapted from Select Business Solutions, “What is the Capability Maturity Model?” http://bit.ly/IFMJI8 (Accessed 2016-
11-10). C 
531 
 
Para verificar as assinaturas, acesse www.tcu.gov.br/autenticidade e informe o código 79193014.

--- Página 84 ---
532 • DMBOK2  
Such an assessment helps identify what is working well, what is not working well, and where an organization 
has gaps. Based on the findings, the organization can develop a roadmap to target:  
•High -value improvement opportunities related to processes, methods, resources, and automation
•Capabilities that align with business strategy
•Governance processes for periodic evaluation of organizational progress based on characteristics in th e
m
odel
A Data Management Maturity Assessment (DMMA) can be used to evaluate data management overall, or it can 
be used to focus on a single Knowledge Area or even a single process. Whatever the focus, a DMMA can help 
bridge the gap between business and IT perspectives on the health and effectiveness of data management practices. A DMMA provides a common language for depicting what pro gress looks like across Data 
Management Knowledge Areas and offers a stage -based path to improvement, which can be tailored to an 
organization’s strategic priorities.
97 Thus, it can be used both to set and to measure organizational goals, as well 
as to compare one’s organization against other organizations or industry benchmarks.  
Before beginning any DMMA, an organization has to establish a baseline understanding of its  current state 
capabilities, assets, goals, and priorities. A certain level of organizational maturity is required to conduct the assessment in the first place, as well as to effectively respond to the assessment results by setting targets, establishing a roadmap, and monitoring progress.  
1.1 Business Drivers  
Organizations conduct capability maturity assessments for a number of reasons: 
•Regulation : Regulatory oversight requires minimum levels of maturity in data management.
•Data Governance : The data governance function requires a maturity assessment for planning and
compliance purposes.
•Organizational readiness for process improvement: An organization recognizes a need to improv e
i
ts practices and begins by assessing its current state. For example, it  makes a commitment to manag e
M
aster Data and needs to assess its readiness to deploy MDM processes and tools.
•Organizational change : An organizational change, such as a merger, presents data management
challenges. A DMMA provides input for planning to mee t these challenges.
•New technology : Advancements in technology offers new ways to manage and use data. The
organization wants to understand the likelihood of successful adoption.
•Data management issues : There is need to address data quality issues or other data management
challenges and the organization wants to baseline its current state in order to make better decisionsabout how to implement change.
97 http://bit.ly/1Vev9xx  July 18 2015. 
 
Para verificar as assinaturas, acesse www.tcu.gov.br/autenticidade e informe o código 79193014.

--- Página 85 ---
DATA MANAGEMENT MATU RITY ASSESSMENT  • 533  
Figure 103  Context Diagram: Data Management Maturity Assessment  Definition : A method for ranking practices for handling data within an organization to 
characterize the current state of data management and its impact on the organization
Goals : 
1.T o comprehensively discover and evaluate critical data management activities across an organization.
2.T o educate stakeholder about concepts, principles, and practices of data management, as well as to identify
their roles and responsibilities in a broader context as the creators and managers of data.
3.T o establish or enhance a sustainable enterprise -wide data management program in support of operational
and strategic goals. 
Activities :
1. Plan the Assessment Activities (P)
1. Establish Scope and Approach
2. Plan Communications
2. Perform Maturity Assessment (C)
1. Gather Information
2. Perform Assessment
3. Interpret Results
3. Develop Recommendations (D)
4. Create T argeted Program for 
Improvements (P)
5. Re-assess Maturity (C)Inputs :
•Business Strategy &
Goals 
•Culture & risk
tolerance
•Maturity
Frameworks & 
DAMA -DMBOK
•Policies, processes, 
standards, operating 
models
•BenchmarksDeliverables :
•Ratings and Ranks
•Maturity Baseline
•Readiness Assessment
•Risk Assessment
•Staffing Capability
•Investment and
outcomes Options
•Recommendations
•Roadmap
•Executive Briefings
Suppliers : 
• Executives
• Data Stewards
• DM Executives
• Subject Matter Experts
• EmployeesConsumers : 
• Executives
• Audit / Compliance
• Regulators
• Data Stewards
• Data Governance
Bodies
• Organizational
Effectiveness GroupParticipants : 
• CDO/CIO
• Business Management
• DM Executives & Data Governance Bodies
• Data Governance Office
• Maturity Assessors
• Employees
T echniques : 
• Data Management
Maturity Frameworks 
Selection
• Community Engagement
• DAMA -DMBOK
• Existing BenchmarksT ools : 
• Data Management Maturity
Frameworks
• Communications Plan
• Collaboration T ools
• Knowledge Management and
Metadata Repositories
• Data Profiling T oolsMetrics : 
• DMMA Local and T otal
Ratings
• Resource Utilization
• Risk Exposure
• Spend Management
• Inputs to DMMA
• Rate of Change
(P) Planning, (C) Control, (D) Development, (O) OperationsData Management Maturity Assessment
Business 
Drivers
Technical 
Drivers
 
Para verificar as assinaturas, acesse www.tcu.gov.br/autenticidade e informe o código 79193014.

--- Página 86 ---
534 • DMBOK2  
1.2 Goals and  Principles  
The primary goal of a data management capability assessment is to evaluate the current state of critical data 
management activities in order to plan for improvement. The evaluation places the organization on the maturity 
scale by clarifying specific strengths and weaknesses. It helps the organization identify, prioritize, and implement improvement opportunities.  
In meeting its primary goal, a DMMA can have a positive impact on culture. It helps: 
•Educate stakeholders about data management concepts, principles, and practices
•Clarify stakeholder roles and responsibilities in relation to organizational data
•Highlight the need to manage data as a critical asset
•Broaden recognition of data management activities across the organization
•Contribute to  improving the collaboration necessary for effective data governan
ce
B
ased on assessment results, an organization can enhance its Data Management program so it supports the 
organization’s operational and strategic direction. Typically, Data Management pro grams develop in 
organizational silos. They rarely begin with an enterprise view of the data. A DMMA can equip the organization to develop a cohesive vision that supports overall organizational strategy. A DMMA enables the organization to clarify prioritie s, crystalize objectives, and develop an integrated plan for improvement.  
1.3 Essential Concepts 
1.3.1 Assessment Levels and Characteristics  
CMMs usually define five or six levels of maturity, each with its own characteristics that span from non -
existent or ad hoc to optimized or high performance. See Figure 104 for a sample visualization.  
The following is a generic summary of macro states of data management maturity . A detailed assessment would 
include criteria for sub -categories like strategy, policy, standards, role definition, etc. within each of the 
Knowledge Areas.  
•Level 0: No Capability: No organized data management practices or formal enterprise processes formanaging data. Very few organizations exist at a Level 0. This level is acknowledged in a maturitymodel for purposes of definition.
•Level 1 Initial / Ad Hoc : General -purpose data management using a limited tool set, with little or no
governance. Data ha ndling is highly reliant on a few experts. Roles and responsibilities are defined
within silos. Each data owner receives, generates, and sends data autonomously. Controls, if they exist,are applied inconsistently. Solutions for managing data are limited. Data quality issues are pervasiv
e
b
ut not addressed. Infrastructure supports are at the business unit level.
 
Para verificar as assinaturas, acesse www.tcu.gov.br/autenticidade e informe o código 79193014.

--- Página 87 ---
DATA MANAGEMENT MATU RITY ASSESSMENT  • 535  
Figure 104  Data Management Maturity Model Example 
Assessment criteria may include the presence of any process controls, such as logging of data quality issues. 
•Level 2 Repeatable: Emergence of consistent tools and role definition to support process execution. In
Level 2, the organization begins to use ce ntralized tools and to provide more oversight for data
management. Roles are defined and processes are not dependent solely on specific experts. There isorganizational awareness of data quality issues and concepts. Concepts of Master and Reference Dat
a
beg
in to be recognized.
Assessment criteria might include formal role definition in artifacts like job descriptions, the existence of process documentation, and the capacity to leverage tool sets.  
•Level 3 Defined : Emerging data management capability. Level 3 sees the introduction and
institutionalization of scalable data management processes and a view of DM as an organizationalenabler. Characteristics include the replication of data across an organization with som e controls in
place and a general increase in overall data quality, along with coordinated policy definition andmanagement. More formal process definition leads to a significant reduction in manual intervention.This, along with a centralized design process, means that process outcomes are more predictable.
Assessment criteria might include the existence of data management policies, the use of scalable processes, and the consistency of data models and system controls.  
•Level 4 Managed : Institutional knowledge gained from growth in Levels 1 -3 enables the organization
to predict results when approaching new projects and tasks and to begin to manage risks related t
o
d
ata. Data management includes performance metrics. Characteristics of Level 4 include standar dized
tools for data management from desktop to infrastructure, coupled with a well -formed centralized
planning and governance function. Expressions of this level are a measurable increase in data qualityand organization -wide capabilities such as end -to-end data audits.Level 1
Initial / Ad Hoc•Little or no 
governance
•Limited tool set
•Roles defined within 
silos
•Controls applied 
inconsistently, if at 
all
•Data quality issues 
not addressed Level 2
Repeatable•Emerging 
governance
•Introduction of a 
consistent tool set
•Some roles and 
processes defined
•Growing awareness 
of impact of data 
quality issues Level 3
Defined•Data viewed as an
organizational
enabler
•Scalable processes 
and tools; reduction
in manual processes 
Process outcomes, 
including data 
quality, are more
predictable Level 4
Managed•Centralized planning 
and governance
•Management of risks 
related to data
•Data Management 
performance 
metrics 
•Measurable
improvements in 
data qualityLevel 5
Optimized•Highly predictable
processes
•Reduced risk 
•Well understood 
metrics to manage
data quality and 
process quality
 
Para verificar as assinaturas, acesse www.tcu.gov.br/autenticidade e informe o código 79193014.

--- Página 88 ---
536 • DMBOK2  
Assessment criteria might include metrics related to project success, operational metrics for systems, and data 
quality metrics.  
•Level 5: Optimization : When data management practices are optimized, they are highly predictable,
due to proce ss automation and technology change management. Organizations at this level of maturity
focus on continuous improvement. At Level 5, tools enable a view data across processes. Theproliferation of data is controlled to prevent needless duplication. Well- understood metrics are used t
o
m
anage and measure data quality and processes.
Assessment criteria might include change management artifacts and metrics on process improvement. 
1.3.2 Assessment Criteria  
Each capability level will have specific assessment criteria related to the processes being evaluated. For 
example, if the maturity of the data modeling function is being evaluated, level 1 may ask whether a data 
modeling practice exists at all and how many systems it extends to; level 2 may ask whether an ap proach to 
enterprise data modeling has been defined; level 3 will ask the degree to which the approach has been implemented; level 4 will ask whether modeling standards have been effectively enforced; and level 5 will ask about processes in place to improv e modeling practices. (See Chapter 5.) 
At any level, assessment criteria will be evaluated along a scale, such as 1 – Not started, 2 – In process, 3 – 
Functional, 4 – Effective, showing progress within that level and movement toward the next level. Scores can 
be combined or visually displayed to enable understanding of the variance between current and desired state.  
When assessing using a model that can be mapped to a DAMA- DMBOK Data Management Knowledge Area, 
criteria could be formulated based on the cate gories in the Context Diagram:  
•Activity : To what degree is the activity or process in place? Are criteria defined for effective and
efficient execution? How well defined and executed is the activity? Are best practice outputs
produced?
•Tools : To what degr ee is the activity automated and supported by a common set of tools? Is tool
training provided within specific roles and responsibilities? Are tools available when and wher
e
n
eeded? Are they configured optimally to provide the most effective and efficient results? To wha t
e
xtent is long -term technology planning in place to accommodate future state capabilities?
•Standards: To what degree is the activity supported by a common set of standards? How well
documented are the standards? Are standards enforced and supported by governance and changemanagement?
•People and resources : To what degree is the organization staffed to carry out the activity? What
specific skills, training, and knowledge are necessary to execute the activity? How well are roles andresponsib ilities defined?
 
Para verificar as assinaturas, acesse www.tcu.gov.br/autenticidade e informe o código 79193014.

--- Página 89 ---
DATA MANAGEMENT MATU RITY ASSESSMENT  • 537  
Figure 105 illustrates one way of presenting a visual summary of findings from a DMMA. For each of the 
capabilities (Governance, Architecture, etc.) the outer ring of the display shows the level of capability the 
organization has determined it needs to compete successfully. The inner ring displays the level of capability as determined via the assessment. Areas where the distance between the two rings is largest represent the greatest risks to the organization. Such a report can help set priorities. It can also be used to measure progress over time.  
Figure 105  Example of a Data Management Maturity Assessment Visu alization  
1.3.3 Existing DMMA Frameworks98 
A data management maturity assessment framework is segmented into discrete data management topics. Framework focus and content vary depending on whether they have a general or industry- specific focus. 
However, most  address subjects that can be mapped to DAMA -DMBOK Knowledge Areas. The examples 
below are intended to illustrate the range of Capability Maturity Models that have been developed in the data management space. Many vendors have developed their own models. O rganizations should evaluate several 
models before choosing a vendor or before developing their own framework.  
98 For additional information and review of existing Data Management CMMs, see: Alan McSweeney, Review of Data 
Management Maturity Models , SlideShare.net, published 2013 -10-23.  http://bit.ly/2spTCY9 . Jeff Gorball, Introduction to 
Data Management Maturity Mod els, SlideShare.net, published 2016- 08-01. McSweeney includes the DAMA -DMBOK as 
one of his maturity models, although the DMBOK is not structured as such.  012345Governance
Architecture
Modeling
Storage & Ops
Security
DII D&CR&MDDW&BIMetadataDQDMM Assessment Chart
Desired rank Current Rank
 
Para verificar as assinaturas, acesse www.tcu.gov.br/autenticidade e informe o código 79193014.

--- Página 90 ---
538 • DMBOK2  
1.3.3.1 CMMI Data Management Maturity Model (DMM)  
The CMMI (Capability Maturity Model Institute) has developed the CMMI -DMM (Data Management Maturity 
Model) which provides assessment criteria for the following data management areas:  
•Data Management Strategy
•Data Governance
•Data Quality
•Platform and Architecture
•Data Operations
•Supporting Processes
Within each of these processes, the model iden tifies sub -processes for evaluation. For example, the Data 
Quality section accounts for Data Quality Strategy and Data Quality Assessment, Profiling, and Cleansing. The 
model also accounts for the relation between the data management areas. For example the need for stakeholder 
alignment and the relation between business processes and Data Quality Management.99 
1.3.3.2 EDM Council DCAM100 
The Enterprise Data Management Council, an industry advocacy organization for financial services headquartered in the United  States, has developed the DCAM (Data Management Capability Assessment 
Model). The result of a membership -driven effort to get consensus on data management best practices, the 
DCAM describes 37 capabilities and 115 sub -capabilities associated with the deve lopment of a sustainable Data 
Management program. Scoring focuses on the level of stakeholder engagement, formality of process, and existence of artifacts that demonstrate the achievement of capabilities.  
1.3.3.3 IBM Data Governance Council Maturity Model
101 
The IBM Data Governance Council Maturity Model was based on input from a council of 55 organizations. 
Council members collaborated to define a common set of observable and desired behaviors that organizations can use to evaluate and design their own data  governance programs. The purpose of the model is to help 
organizations build consistency and quality control in governance through proven business technologies, collaborative methods, and best practices. The model is organized around four key categories:  
•Outcomes : Data risk management and compliance, value creation
•Enablers : Organizational structure and awareness, policy, stewardship
99 http://bit.ly/1Vev9xx accessed  2015 -07-18. 
100 http://bit.ly/2sqaSga  accessed  2015- 07-18. 
101 https://ib m.co/2sRfBIn (accessed  2016- 12-04). 
 
Para verificar as assinaturas, acesse www.tcu.gov.br/autenticidade e informe o código 79193014.

--- Página 91 ---
DATA MANAGEMENT MATU RITY ASSESSMENT  • 539  
•Core disciplines : Data Quality Management, information lifecycle management, information securit y
a
nd privacy
•Supporting Di sciplines : Data Architecture, classification and Metadata, audit information, logging
and reporting
The IBM model is presented both as a Maturity Framework and as a set of assessment questions with answers 
constructed to indicate maturity levels.  
1.3.3.4 Stanford Data Governance Maturity Model102 
The Stanford Data Governance Maturity Model was developed for use by the University; it was not intended to be an industry standard. Even still, it serves as a solid example of a model that provides guidance and a st andard 
of measurement. The model focuses on data governance, not data management, but it nevertheless provides a basis for evaluating data management overall. The model differentiates between foundational (awareness, formalization, Metadata) and project (data stewardship, Data Quality, Master Data) components. Within each, it articulates drivers for people, policies, and capabilities. It then articulates characteristics of each level of maturity. It also provides qualitative and quantitative measurements fo r each level.  
1.3.3.5 Gartner’s Enterprise Information Management Maturity Model  
Gartner has published an EIM maturity model, which establishes criteria for evaluating vision, strategy, metrics, governance, roles and responsibilities, lifecycle, and infra structure.  
2.Activities
Data Management Maturity Assessments require planning. To ensure practical, actionable results, allow time within the plan for preparation of materials and evaluation of results. Assessments should be conducted in a short, defined  timeframe. The purpose of the evaluation is expose current strengths and opportunities for 
improvement – not to solve problems.  
Evaluations are conducted by soliciting knowledge from business, data management, and information technology participants. The  goal is to reach a consensus view of current state capabilities, supported by 
evidence. Evidence may come from examination of artifacts (such as whether database backups exist), through interviews (verifying someone is performing system of record evaluati on for re -use), or both.  
102 http://stanford.io/2sBR5bZ (accessed 2016 -12-04) and http://stanford.io/2rVPyM2 (accessed 2016 -12-04). 
 
Para verificar as assinaturas, acesse www.tcu.gov.br/autenticidade e informe o código 79193014.

--- Página 92 ---
540 • DMBOK2  
Assessments can and should be scaled to fit the needs of the organization. However, amend with care. Models 
may lose rigor or traceability to original intent if shortened or edited. Keep the integrity of the model intact when custo mizing.  
2.1 Plan Assessment Activities 
Planning for an assessment includes defining the overall approach and communicating with stakeholders before and during the assessment to ensure they are engaged. The assessment itself includes collecting and evaluating inputs and communicating results, re commendations, and action plans.  
2.1.1 Define Objectives  
Any organization that decides it should assess its data management maturity level is already engaged in the effort to improve its practices. In most cases, such an organization will have identified the drivers for the assessment. These drivers must be clarified in the form of objectives that describe the focus and influence the scope of the assessment. The objectives for the assessment must be clearly understood by executives and the lines of business, who can help ensure alignment with the organization’s strategic direction.  
Assessment objectives also provide criteria by which to evaluate which assessment model to adopt, which 
business areas to prioritize for assessment, and who should provide di rect input to the process.  
2.1.2 Choose a Framework  
As described in Section 1.3.3, existing frameworks focus on different aspects of data management. Review these frameworks in the context of assumptions about current state and assessment objectives in or der to choose 
one that will inform the organization in meaningful ways. Focus areas of the assessment model can be customized based on organizational focus or scope.  
The choice of framework influences how the assessment is conducted. The team working on it  should have 
expertise in the model and the methodology on which it depends.  
2.1.3 Define Organizational Scope 
Most DMM Frameworks are designed to apply to an entire enterprise. However, an enterprise- wide scope may 
be impractical. For a first assessment, it is usually best to define a manageable scope, such as a single business area or program. The areas chosen represent a meaningful subset of the organization and participants should be able to influence key business processes that affect the data assets  within scope. As part of a phased approach, 
 
Para verificar as assinaturas, acesse www.tcu.gov.br/autenticidade e informe o código 79193014.

--- Página 93 ---
DATA MANAGEMENT MATU RITY ASSESSMENT  • 541  
evaluation can be repeated for other parts of the organization. There are trade- offs between local and enterprise 
assessments:  
•Localized assessments  can go much deeper into the details. They can also be done more quickly
because the scope is contained. To do a localized assessment, select a function that is highly regulated,
such as financial reporting within a public company. The inputs, roles, tools, and consumers may beoutside of the functions being assessed, which can complicate the scoping and execution of th
e
as
sessment. Well -planned localized assessments can often be aggregated and weighted to form an
enterprise assessment, since many data assets are shared.
•Enterprise assessments  focus on the broad and sometimes disconnected parts of an organization. An
enterprise assessment may be created from localized DMMA’s or it can be a separate undertaking. Forexample, an organization may evaluate different functions (research and development, manufacturing,and financing) based on the same criteria. The inputs, roles, tools, and consumers are typically pan -
enterprise and multi -leveled.
2.1.4 Define Interaction Approach  
In conducting a DMMA, an organization should follow recommendations for the selected model. In formation 
gathering activities may include workshops, interviews, surveys, and artifact reviews. Employ methods that work well within the organizational culture, minimize the time commitment from participants, and enable the assessment to be completed quickly so that actions from the assessment can be defined while the process is fresh in participants’ minds.  
In all cases, responses will need to be formalized by having participants rate the assessment criteria. In many cases, assessment will also include a ctual inspection and evaluation of artifacts and other evidence.  
If there are delays in completing the assessment, stakeholders are likely to lose enthusiasm for the Data Management program and the impetus for contributing to positive change. It is advisa ble to avoid detailed and 
comprehensive analysis and to emphasize sound judgment based on the expertise of the assessment leaders. The DMM Frameworks provide the measurement criteria and an embedded path to improvement. These enable synthesis of a complete picture of the current Data Management program and its parts.  
2.1.5 Plan Communications  
Communications contribute to the overall success of the assessment and the action items coming out of it. Communication will be directed at participants and other sta keholders. Findings may impact people’s jobs, 
through changes in methodology and organizational alignment, so it is important to communicate clearly about the purpose, the process, and specific expectations for individuals and groups. Ensure participants u nderstand 
the assessment model, as well as how the findings will be used.  
 
Para verificar as assinaturas, acesse www.tcu.gov.br/autenticidade e informe o código 79193014.

--- Página 94 ---
542 • DMBOK2  
Before the assessment begins, stakeholders should be informed about expectations for the assessment. 
Communications should describe:  
•The purpose of the DMMA
•How it will be conducte d
•What their involvement may be
•The schedule of assessment activities
During any activity of the assessment (for example, a focus group meeting), ensure there is a clear agenda, 
including a plan to answer any follow up questions. Continually remind participants of the goals and objectives. 
Always thank the participants and describe next steps.  
Determine if the planned approach is likely to be successful across the targeted business scope, including such factors as resistance / cooperation, possible internal legal concerns about exposure to outside inspection if troubling gaps are found, or possible Human Resources concerns.  
The communications plan should include a schedule to report on findings and recommendations at all levels, including general rep orts and executive briefings.  
2.2 Perform Maturity Assessment  
2.2.1 Gather Information 
The next step is to gather appropriate inputs for the assessment, based on the interaction model. At a minimum, 
the information gathered will include formal ratings of  assessment criteria. It may also include input from 
interviews and focus groups, system analysis and design documentation, data investigation, email strings, procedure manuals, standards, policies, file repositories, approval workflows, various work produ cts, Metadata 
repositories, data and integration reference architectures, templates, and forms.  
2.2.2 Perform the Assessment  
The overall rating assignments and interpretation are typically multi -phased. Participants will have different 
opinions generating different ratings across the assessment topics. Discussion and rationalization will be needed 
to reconcile the ratings. Input is provided by the participants and then refined through artifact reviews or examination by the assessment team. The goal is to come to a consensus view of current state. This view should be supported by evidence (i.e., proof of practice demonstrated by behavior and artifacts). If stakeholders do not have consensus on current state, it is difficult to have consensus on how to improv e the organization.  
The refinement generally works as follows: 
 
Para verificar as assinaturas, acesse www.tcu.gov.br/autenticidade e informe o código 79193014.

--- Página 95 ---
DATA MANAGEMENT MATU RITY ASSESSMENT  • 543  
•Review results against the rating method and assign a preliminary rating to each work product or
activity.
•Document the supporting evidence.
•Review with participants to come to consensus on a final rating for each area. If appropriate, us e
w
eight modifiers based on the importance of each criterion.
•Document the interpretation of the rating using the model criteria statements and assessor comments.
•Develop visualizations to illustrate results of the assessment.
2.3 Interpret Results  
Interpretation of the results consists of identifying improvement opportunities aligned with organizational strategy and recommending actions required to take advantage of these opportunities. In other words, interp retation defines next steps toward a target state. When the assessment is complete, organizations need to 
plan for the target state that they aspire to achieve in data management. The amount of time and effort required to achieve the desired target will vary, depending on the starting point, the culture of the organization, and the drivers for change.  
When presenting assessment results, start with the meaning of the ratings for the organization. The ratings can be expressed with respect to organizational and cultural drivers as well as business goals, such as customer satisfaction or increased sales. Illustrate the linkage between the current capabilities of the organization and the business processes and strategies that they support, and the benefits of im proving these capabilities by moving 
to the target state.  
2.3.1 Report Assessment Results 
The assessment report should include:  
•Business drivers for the assessment
•Overall results of the assessment
•Ratings by topic with gaps indicated
•A recommended approach to close gaps
•Strengths of the organization as observed
•Risks to progress
•Investment and outcomes options
•Governance and metrics to measure progress
•Resource analysis and potential future utilization
•Artifacts that can be used or re- used within the  organization
The assessment report is an input to the enhancement of the Data Management program, either as a whole or by Data Management Knowledge Area. From it, the organization can develop or advance its data management 
 
Para verificar as assinaturas, acesse www.tcu.gov.br/autenticidade e informe o código 79193014.

--- Página 96 ---
544 • DMBOK2  
strategy. Strategy should includ e initiatives that further business goals through improved governance of 
processes and standards.  
2.3.2 Develop Executive Briefings  
The assessment team should prepare executive briefings that summarize findings – strengths, gaps, and 
recommendations – that executives will use as input to decisions about targets, initiatives, and timelines. The 
team must tailor the messages to clarify likely impacts and benefits for each executive group.  
Often executives wish to aim higher than the assessment recommendation s. In other words, they want to skip 
levels in the maturity model. Targeting a higher level of maturity has to be reflected in the impact analysis for 
the recommendations. There is a cost to this kind of acceleration, and costs must be balanced against ben efits.  
2.4 Create a Targeted Program for Improvements  
The DMMA should have a direct impact on data strategy and IT governance, as well as the Data Management program and strategy. Recommendations from the DMMA should be actionable. These should describe capabilities the organizational requires. In doing so, an assessment can be a powerful tool for IT and business 
leaders to set organizational priorities and allocate resources.  
2.4.1 Identify Actions and Create a Roadmap  
DMMA ratings highlight items for management attention. Initially, a rating is likely to be used as a standalone metric to determine how well an organization is doing a specific activity. However, ratings can be quickly operationalized into ongoing measures, especially for activities where change is desired (e.g., “The target is level ‘n’ because we need or want to be able to do something ‘z’”). If the assessment model is used for ongoing measurement, its criteria not only guide s the organization to higher levels of maturity, its criteria als o keep s 
organizational attention on improvement efforts.  
The DMM assessment results should be detailed and comprehensive enough to support a multiple year data management improvement program, including initiatives that will build data management capability  as the 
organization adopt best practices. Since change largely happens in organizations through projects, new projects must be influenced to adopt better practices. The roadmap or reference plan should contain:  
•Sequenced activities to effect improvements  in specific data management functions
•A timeline for implementing improvement activities
•Expect ed improvements in DMMA ratings  once activities have been implemented
•Oversight activities, including the maturing this oversight over the timeline
 
Para verificar as assinaturas, acesse www.tcu.gov.br/autenticidade e informe o código 79193014.

--- Página 97 ---
DATA MANAGEMENT MATU RITY ASSESSMENT  • 545  
The roadmap  will give targets and a pace for change within prioritized work streams, and accompanied by an 
approach for measuring progress.  
2.5 Re-assess Maturity  
Re-assessments should be conducted at regular intervals. They are part of the cycle of continuous impr ovement:  
•Establish a baseline rating through the first assessmen t
•D
efine re- assessment parameters, including organizational scop e
•R
epeat DMM assessment as necessary on a published schedule
•Track trends relative to the initial baseline
•Develop recommendat ions based on the re -assessment findings
Re-assessment can also re -invigorate or refocus effort. Measurable progress assists in maintaining commitment 
and enthusiasm across the organization. Changes to regulatory frameworks, internal or external policy, or 
innovations that could change the approa ch to governance and strategies are additional reasons to re- assess 
periodically.  
3.T ools
•Data Management Maturity Framework : The primary tool used in a maturity assessment is the
DMM framework itself.
•Communication Plan: A communication plan includes an engagement model for stakeholders, th e
t
ype of information to be shared, and the schedule for sharing information.
•Collaboration Tools : Collaboration tools allow findings from the assessment to be shared. In addition,
evidence of data management practices may be found in email, completed templates, and review
documents created via standard processes for collaborative design, operations, incident tracking,reviews, and approvals.
•Knowledge Management and Metadata Repositories : Data standards, policies, methods, agendas,
minutes of meetings or decisions, and business and technical artifacts that serve as proof of practi
ce
m
ay be managed in these repositories. In some CMMs, lack of such repositories is an indicator of
lower maturity in the organization. Metadata repositories can exist in several constructs, which may
not be obvious to the participants. For example, some Business Intelligence applications relycompletely on Metadata to compile their views and reports, while no t referring to it as a separat
e
d
istinct repository.
 
Para verificar as assinaturas, acesse www.tcu.gov.br/autenticidade e informe o código 79193014.

--- Página 98 ---
546 • DMBOK2  
4.Te chniques
Many techniques related to executing a DMMA are defined by the methodology of the DMM framework 
chosen. Techniques that are more general are described here.  
4.1 Selecting a DMM Framework  
The following criteria should be considered when selecting a DMM framework. 
•Accessibility : Practices are stated in non -technical terms that convey the functional essence of th e
a
ctivity.
•Comprehensiveness : The framework addresses a broad scope of data man agement activities and
includes business engagement, not merely IT processes.
•Extensible and flexible : The model is structured to enable enhancement of industry- specific or
additional disciplines and can be used either in whole or in part, depending on the  needs of th e
o
rganization.
•Future progress path built -in: While specific priorities differ from organization to organization, the
DMM framework outlines a logical way forward within each of the functions it describes.
•Industry -agnostic vs. industry -specif ic: Some organizations will benefit from an industry -specifi c
ap
proach, others from a more generic framework. Any DMM framework should also adhere to dat a
m
anagement best practices that cross verticals.
•Level of abstraction or detail : Practices and evaluation criteria are expressed at a sufficient level of
detail to ensure that they can be related to the organization and the work it performs.
•Non-prescriptive: The framework describes what needs to be performed, not how it must be
performed.
•Organized by top ic: The framework places data management activities in their appropriate context,
enabling each to be evaluated separately, while recognizing the dependencies.
•Repeatable : The framework can be consistently interpreted, supporting repeatable results to comp are
a
n organization against others in its industry and to track progress over time.
•Supported by a neutral, independent organization: The model should be vendor neutral in order t o
av
oid conflicts of interest, and widely available to ensure a broad representation of best practices.
•Technology neutral : The focus of the model should be on practices, rather than tools.
•Training support included: The model is supported by comprehensive training to enable
professionals to master the framework and optimize its u se.
4.2 DAMA -DMBOK Framework Use 
The DAMA -DMBOK can be used to prepare for or establish criteria for a DMMA. Execution owners will see a 
direct linkage between segmented functions (the Knowledge Areas) and the corresponding tasks (activities). 
 
Para verificar as assinaturas, acesse www.tcu.gov.br/autenticidade e informe o código 79193014.

--- Página 99 ---
DATA MANAGEMENT MATU RITY ASSESSMENT  • 547  
The DMBOK Kn owledge Areas, activities, and deliverables (work products) can be configured to a specific 
DMM framework based on the areas measured, their supporting activities, relevancy, and time available. This 
fast, checklist approach can be used to determine areas that need deeper analysis, represent gaps, or point to hot spots for remediation.  
The DMBOK offers an additional advantage as an assessment -planning tool: There is a large community of 
knowledge professionals using the DMBOK as a guide across multiple indu stries, creating a community of 
practice around its use.  
5.Guidelines for a DMMA
5.1 Readiness Assessment / Risk Assessment 
Before conducting a maturity assessment, it is helpful to identify potential risks and some risk mitigation 
strategies. Table 33 summarizes risks and mitigation approaches.  
Table 33 Typical Risks and Mitigations for a DMMA  
Risk  Mitigation  
Lack of organizational buy -in Socialize the concepts related to the assessment. 
Establish benefit statements before conducting the assessment. Share articles 
and success stories.  Engage an executive sponsor to champion the effort and 
review the results.  
Lack of DMMA expertise  
Lack of time or in -house 
expertise  
Lack of communication 
planning or standards  Use third party resources or specialists. Require knowledge transfer and 
training as part of the engagement.  
Lack of ‘Data Speak’ in the 
organization; Conversati ons on 
data quickly devolve into 
discussions about systems  Relate the DMMA to specific business problems or scenarios.  
Address in the communications plan. The DMMA will educate all 
participants regardless of background and technical experience. Orient 
participants to key concepts prior to the DMMA.  
Incomplete or out -of-date 
assets for analysis  Flag ‘as of’ or balance the rating accordingly. For example, give a -1 to 
everything that is over 1 year out -of-date.  
Narrow focus  Reduce the investigation depth t o a simple DMMA and go to other areas for a 
quick assessment to establish ratings for a later comparative baseline. 
Conduct the first DMMA as a pilot, then apply lessons learned to address a broader scope.  Present in -scope focus of proposed assessment in c ontext of 
DAMA -DMBOK Knowledge Areas. Illustrate what is being left out of scope 
and discuss the need to include.  
Inaccessible staff or systems  Reduce the horizontal scope of the DMMA by focusing only on available 
Knowledge Areas and staff  
Surprises arise such as a 
regulation changes  Add flexibility into the assessment work stream and focus.  
 
Para verificar as assinaturas, acesse www.tcu.gov.br/autenticidade e informe o código 79193014.

--- Página 100 ---
548 • DMBOK2  
5.2 Organizational and Cultural Change 
Establishing or enhancing a Data Management program includes changes to processes, methods, and tools. 
With these changes, culture must also change. Organizational and cultural transformation begins with 
acknowledging that things can be better. Measurement  functions typically usher in meaningful change. The 
DMMA locates the organization on a maturity scale and provides a roadmap for improvement. Doing so, it can point an organization forward through change. The DMMA results should be part of a larger discus sion within 
an organization. When properly supported by effective data governance, DMMA results can coalesce differing perspectives, result in a shared vision, and accelerate an organization’s progress. ( See Chapter 17. ) 
6.M aturity Management Governance
Typically, a DMMA is part of an overall set of data governance activities, each of which has a lifecycle. The 
lifecycle of a DMMA consists of the initial planning and initial assessment, followed by recommendations, an action plan, and periodic re- evaluatio n. The lifecycle itself should be governed.  
6.1 DMMA Process Oversight  
Oversight for the DMMA process belongs to the Data Governance team. If formal Data Governance is not in place, then oversight defaults to the steering committee or management layer tha t initiated the DMMA. The 
process should have an executive sponsor, ideally the CDO, to ensure improvements in data management activities map directly to business objectives.  
The breadth and depth of oversight depend on the DMMA’s scope. Each function inv olved in the process has a 
voice in the execution, method, results, and roadmaps coming from the overall assessment. Each involved data 
management area and organization function will have an independent view, but also will have a common language through the DMM framework.  
6.2 Metrics 
In addition to being a core component of any improvement strategy, metrics are a key communications tool. 
Initial DMMA metrics are the ratings representing the current state of data management. These can be 
periodically reassessed to show improvement trends. Each organization should develop metrics tailored to its target state roadmap. Sample metrics could include:  
•DMMA ratings : DMMA ratings present a snapshot of the organization’s capability level. The ratings
may be accompanied by a description, perhaps a custom weighting for the rating across an assessmentor specific topic area, and a recommended target state.
 
Para verificar as assinaturas, acesse www.tcu.gov.br/autenticidade e informe o código 79193014.

--- Página 101 ---
DATA MANAGEMENT MATU RITY ASSESSMENT  • 549  
•Resource utilization rates : Powerful examples of metrics that help express the cost of dat a
m
anagement in the form  of head count. An example of this type of metric is: “Every resource in th e
o
rganization spends 10% of their time manually aggregating data.”
•Risk exposure  or the ability to respond to risk scenarios expresses an organization’s capabilities
relative to th eir DMMA ratings. For example, if an organization wanted to begin a new business that
required a high level of automation but their current operating model is based on manual dat a
m
anagement (Level 1), they would be at risk of not delivering.
•Spend management  expresses how the cost of data management is allocated across an organization
and identifies the impacts of this cost on sustainability and value. These metrics overlap with dat a
g
overnance metrics.
oData management sustainability
oAchievement o f initiative goals and objectives
oEffectiveness of communication
oEffectiveness of education and training
oSpeed of change adoption
oData management value
oContributions to business objectives
oReductions in risks
oImproved efficiency in operations
•Inputs to  the DMMA  are important to manage as they speak to the completeness of coverage, level of
investigation, and detail of the scope relevant for interpretation of the scoring results. Core inputs
could include the following: count, coverage, availability, num ber of systems, data volumes, teams
involved, etc.
•Rate of Change  The rate at which an organization is improving its capability. A baseline is established
through the DMMA. Periodic reassessment is used to trend improvement.
7.W orks Cited / Recommended
Afflerbach, Peter. Essential Readings on Assessment . International Reading Association, 2010. Print.  
Baskarada, Sasa. IQM -CMM: Information Quality Management Capability Maturity Model . Vieweg+Teubner Verlag, 2009. 
Print. Ausgezeichnete Arbeiten zur Informat ionsqualität.  
Boutros, Tristan and Tim Purdie. The Process Improvement Handbook: A Blueprint for Managing Change and Increasing 
Organizational Performance . McGraw -Hill Education, 2013. Print.  
CMMI Institute (website). http://bit.ly/1Vev9xx . 
Crawford, J. Ke nt. Project Management Maturity Model . 3rd ed.  Auerbach Publications, 2014. Print. PM Solutions 
Research.  
 
Para verificar as assinaturas, acesse www.tcu.gov.br/autenticidade e informe o código 79193014.

--- Página 102 ---
550 • DMBOK2  
Enterprise Data Management Council (website). 
Freund, Jack and Jack Jones.  Measuring and Managing Information Risk: A FAIR Approach . Butterworth -Heinemann, 
2014.  Print.  
Ghavami, Peter PhD. Big Data Governance: Modern Data Management Principles for Hadoop, NoSQL and Big Data 
Analytics . CreateSpace Independent Publishing Platform, 2015. Print.  
Honeysett, Sarah. Limited Capability - The Assessment Phase . Amazon Digital Services LLC., 2013. Social Insecurity Book 
3. 
IBM Data Governance Council.  https://ibm.co/2sUKIng . 
Jeff Gorball, Introduction to Data Management Maturity Models . SlideShare.net, 2016 -08-01. http://bit.ly/2tsIOqR . 
Marchewka, Jack T. Informat ion Technology Project Management: Providing Measurable Organizational Value . 5th ed.  
Wiley, 2016. Print.  
McSweeney, Alan. Review of Data Management Maturity Models . SlideShare.net, 2013- 10-23. http://bit.ly/2spTCY9 . 
Persse, James R. Implementing the Capability Maturity Model. Wiley, 2001.Print.  
Saaksvuori, Antti. Product Management Maturity Assessment Framework . Sirrus Publishing Ltd., 2015. Print.  
Select Business Solutions. “What is the Capability Maturity Model?” http://bit.ly/IFMJI8 (Accessed 2016 -11-10).  
Stanford University. Stanford Data Governance Maturity Model . http://stanford.io/2ttOMrF . 
Van Haren Publishing. IT Capability Maturity Framework IT -CMF . Van Haren Pub, 2015. Print.  
 
Para verificar as assinaturas, acesse www.tcu.gov.br/autenticidade e informe o código 79193014.
